Intelligent Approach Expands 
Possibilities for Parking Automation
Parking assistance features like proximity warnings and driver-monitored hands-free 
parking have become common conveniences across most vehicle classes.
But as consumers increasingly demand more advanced parking features, it is becoming 
clear that autonomous parking systems must be designed as safety-critical technologies, 
not just as mere conveniences. A vehicle that is parking itself must be fully aware of 
nearby pedestrians, cognizant of all the available space around it and intelligent enough 
to use that information to execute the maneuver safely and efficiently.
That means that technologies used in advanced driver assistance systems (ADAS) for 
driving on local streets are critical to ensuring higher performance and safety when it 
comes to parking assistance. The same sensors and machine learning intelligence that 
power ADAS in complex urban driving scenarios and in difficult lighting and weather 
conditions will play key roles in automated parking as it evolves.
WHITE PAPER
1

THE UNIVERSAL CHALLENGE 
Parking is the expected conclusion of every 
vehicle trip, but the conditions under which this 
occurs can be as varied as an empty, well-lit 
parking garage, a driveway at night or a crowded 
parking lot in a rainstorm. Whether nosed in, 
backed in or parallel parked, every vehicle is 
expected to safely come to rest.
Automating that function across all conditions 
starts with robust sensing and perception 
capabilities. While many parking automation 
features rely primarily on ultrasonic sensors and 
cameras, state-of-the-art radar enhanced with 
artificial intelligence and machine learning (AI/
ML) has significant advantages over other forms 
of sensing. Using radar to interpret a parking 
environment transforms the way in which a vehicle 
can plan and carry out parking tasks. 
Enhanced radar data, fused with inputs from 
cameras and ultrasonic sensors, enables safe, 
reliable parking features with increasing levels 
of vehicle automation. For example, vehicles 
can use radar to identify an open parking space 
from a sufficient distance to pull into it directly, 
without going so slowly as to frustrate nearby 
drivers. Other sensing modalities often require 
the vehicle to first drive past the space when 
traveling at typical parking lot speeds. Intelligent 
systems can also map a parking area and be 
trained to navigate it later, and radar will let Level 
4 autonomous cars safely drive away to park 
themselves in a garage and return on demand.
EFFICIENT, ROBUST PERCEPTION
Radar has significant advantages over both vision 
and ultrasonic sensors, creating more robust 
360-degree sensing under a wider range of 
conditions. Because of these advantages, radar 
is increasingly becoming foundational for a wide 
range of ADAS features, but radar’s advantages 
also enable OEMs to create parking features with 
greater capabilities over a broader operational 
design domain. 
Compared with ultrasonic sensors — core 
components of many parking assistance systems 
— radar offers much longer range: potentially 
five to 10 times farther. This extended range 
significantly improves collision avoidance and 
enables new parking actions. For example, 
ultrasonic sensors can measure the size of a 
parking space only when directly in front of 
it, forcing the vehicle to drive past the space, 
back up, and return to enter it. Radar detects a 
suitable space between two parked vehicles from 
a farther distance, allowing the vehicle to directly 
maneuver into it.
In addition, recent advances in radar have 
expanded its field of view vertically so it can 
detect overhanging obstacles, such as tractor-
trailer rigs or objects extending from the bed of a 
pickup truck.
Radar has key advantages over vision systems for 
accurately perceiving distance and distinguishing 
among objects. Radar detection inherently 
provides the distance to an object, while vision 
systems are limited by cameras’ 2D perception. 
Vision systems have to rely on triangulation 
techniques while moving past objects to 
determine the distance to a given object in 
its field of view, such as a parked car, and the 
perception of distance with these systems 
declines at longer ranges. Radar is also better 
at distinguishing between one or two partially 
overlapping objects, such as pedestrians. 
High availability
In addition, radar works in certain conditions, 
such as rain, fog and darkness, that make other 
sensors less reliable. Front-facing cameras rely on 
windshield wipers or headlights to keep their view 
clear, but cameras elsewhere around the vehicle 
lack those features. A buildup of salt, dust and 
grime, which may be a constant presence during 
severe weather, can degrade the performance of 
cameras and ultrasonic sensors, even triggering 
proximity alarms when ultrasonic signals bounce 
back from a heavy buildup of material on the 
surface of a sensor. 
ADVANCED PARKING
2

These conditions have much less effect on the 
transmission of radar waves, so radar units 
mounted around a vehicle can provide reliable 
360-degree sensing in the widest possible range 
of driving scenarios. 
INTELLIGENT PERCEPTION
Innovations in radar hardware and signal 
processing are building on the technology’s 
inherent strengths, thus enabling new 
applications across the full range of vehicle 
automation, from parking to high-speed ADAS 
and autonomous driving. 
Sensing gains precision
Emerging 3D air-waveguide technologies for 
radar antennas allow for the use of special 
radar beams tailored to specific applications. 
These technologies efficiently illuminate the 
environment with radar signals and receive the 
faint echoes that return with low loss, enabling 
higher precision while keeping costs down and 
sensor size the same. With 3D air waveguides, 
radar sensors receive more of the data needed  
to identify where objects are, how fast they  
are moving and even what they are, by feeding  
the data to machine learning systems to  
classify objects. 
The latest generation of radar also adds a fourth 
dimension, sensing elevation. This allows the 
system to create a radar point cloud to model the 
surrounding environment in high definition, with 
important details such as low curbs, overhead 
signs and parking garage gates.
AI/ML: A force multiplier
Artificial intelligence and machine learning are 
doing the most to transform the capabilities of 
radar. The growing power of flexible, centralized 
onboard computing platforms and the rapid 
development of pattern-recognition algorithms 
are helping to make this possible. 
Radar has been used primarily to detect the 
location, direction and speed of vehicles and 
other highly reflective objects, especially for 
high-speed ADAS applications such as adaptive 
cruise control. Now, machine learning techniques 
like those used to train in-vehicle vision systems 
to distinguish among vehicles, pedestrians and 
roadside infrastructure are being applied to  
radar signals. 
Better at Spotting Parking Spots
Several different sensing technologies 
can detect open parking spaces, but 
radar excels at detecting those spaces 
sooner at conventional parking-lot driving 
speeds.
A few meters away
Cameras
1
2
3
4
Radar
15 meters away
1
2
Detection only possible after 
passing the open spot
Ultrasonic
1
2
3
4
ADVANCED PARKING
3

Enhanced resolution, trained neural networks 
and more powerful radar reception algorithms 
give these intelligent systems greater ability to 
correctly identify stationary and less-reflective 
objects. In parking applications, the combination 
allows vehicles to analyze all potential obstacles 
in the environment, including partially occluded 
objects such as pedestrians walking behind cars. 
Sensor fusion adds value
Vision remains essential to many parking 
applications for uses such as reading signs and 
identifying lane markings, and such data can 
be merged with radar inputs through sensor 
fusion. Readings from ultrasonic sensors, which 
provide low-cost short-range sensing, can also 
be merged with this data. Sensor fusion helps to 
build the best possible picture of the surrounding 
environment. 
Radar is especially well suited to AI/ML processing 
compared with other sensing technologies. 
Unlike ultrasonic sensors, radar captures enough 
detail to be used for object classification. But it 
generates less overall data than vision systems, 
which take in unnecessary details such as 
vehicle color, so identifying hazards requires less 
computing power in the vehicle’s core computing 
platform. In-vehicle preprocessing of data from 
radar sensors can further reduce computing 
requirements.
ADVANCED PARKING 
BREAKTHROUGHS
Several next-generation parking assistance 
features benefit from advances in sensing and 
perception including AI/ML signal processing, 
for increased automation, availability and safety. 
Aptiv has developed four such applications. 
Auto Parking Assist
Auto Parking Assist allows a vehicle to 
automatically find, enter and exit a parking 
spot. It controls the steering, speed, brakes and 
gearbox while the driver monitors the process 
from inside or outside the vehicle. Radar sensors 
scan a parking lot and identify a suitable space. 
The vehicle can then go directly to it and 
maneuver into it — and later leave the space — 
with no driver input. A neural network processes 
radar data using AI/ML to detect, track and 
identify all types of hazards while integrating 
vision to read signs and road markings. 
As an SAE Level 2 automation feature, Auto 
Parking Assist can operate only when the driver is 
paying attention and ready to take control, either 
in the vehicle or at a distance with a key fob or 
smartphone app that can stop the vehicle. This 
allows owners to park in spaces that are exposed 
to weather or too tight for the doors to open.
Memory Parking 
This feature, first demonstrated by Aptiv at CES 
2023, allows a vehicle to record the process of 
parking in a given location and later repeat it 
automatically with the driver present.
The first time a driver parks in a given location 
and instructs the system to record, Memory 
Parking detects and classifies all stationary 
objects in the environment, exclusively with radar 
enhanced with AI/ML. It uses this data to build a 
virtual map that remains in the vehicle, and the 
data recorded on subsequent trips is aggregated 
to keep the map current. If there is a major, 
permanent change in the area, Memory Parking 
will instruct the driver to retrain it.
Memory Parking models the scene using an 
occupancy grid, in which a radar reception 
algorithm classifies any stationary object in a 
given quadrant, such as a garage pillar, to a high 
degree of certainty. The virtual map, along with 
real-time sensor inputs, enables the vehicle to 
situate itself within the learned environment 
through simultaneous location and mapping. 
Memory Parking self-maps the area without 
referring to any existing map, but it can also be 
aligned to a commercial map of the surrounding 
area when one is available. This feature — also 
known as home zone parking — is designed 
ADVANCED PARKING
4

for navigating to a space or garage on private 
property, such as a home driveway. A Level 2 
“summon” feature is possible using the same 
technologies without any further training.
Though designed initially as an SAE Level 2+ 
feature that requires driver monitoring from 
either inside or outside the vehicle, Memory 
Parking could be implemented as Level 4 — 
allowing vehicle autonomy within a limited domain 
— with enough redundant sensing and computing 
systems to ensure safety.
Auto Park Valet
This Level 4 parking feature on the Aptiv road 
map will enable a vehicle to drop off passengers, 
find a suitable parking space and return when 
summoned, all without driver monitoring or 
control. It will provide full autonomy within an 
operational design domain limited to parking.
Auto Park Valet will use high-definition digital 
maps from outside sources for localization and 
navigation within parking areas. In real time, it will 
use combined radar and vision to find suitable 
parking spaces from a distance and enter them 
directly. Auto Park Valet is designed for parking 
in public lots and garages without training and 
will rely on high-definition large-area maps that 
are expected to become commercially available in 
parallel with the on-vehicle capabilities. 
Surround View
This feature uses sensor fusion to combine data 
from radar, vision and ultrasonic sensors in a 
view of the vehicle’s surroundings shown on the 
in-cabin display. It stitches together images from 
multiple surround-view cameras and can provide 
multiple viewing angles. Other information, 
such as the current steering path and distance 
warnings, can be overlayed onto the video image.
Advanced Parking Options
Advances in sensing and perception 
enable several parking applications.
This feature combines data from 
radar, vision and ultrasonic sensors to 
build a view on the in-cabin display.
Auto Parking Assist: Operates with human oversight
The vehicle parks 
itself, but with 
constant monitoring 
by a human driver.
Auto Park Valet: Performs fully autonomous parking
The vehicle uses maps and 
sensing data to ﬁnd an 
open space and park.
Surround View: Creates comprehensive view
Memory Parking: Learns frequent parking patterns
After enough 
repetition, the 
vehicle is able 
to complete 
the maneuver 
on its own.
Every time a human 
driver parks in the same 
place, the system learns.
ADVANCED PARKING
5

A SYSTEM APPROACH
Parking assistance is increasingly not just a 
convenience feature but a part of the continuum 
of vehicle automation, subject to all the real-world 
safety demands imposed on this technology. As 
parking assistance features evolve from Level 2 to 
Level 4 and beyond, unlocking increasing degrees 
of autonomy, the most capable and cost-efficient 
parking automation solutions will be those that 
combine ADAS cruising innovations with the 
power of AI-enabled radar. 
An end-to-end ADAS platform provides a 
complete safety package, including features 
such as forward collision warning and automatic 
emergency braking, that can be extended 
into parking automation features with proven 
effectiveness and reliability. In addition, 
comprehensive ADAS development and testing 
generates a wealth of knowledge on nearly 
all types of driving scenarios, adding to the 
robustness of parking capabilities. 
Parking assistance is a critical component of 
Aptiv’s Gen 6 ADAS platform. The next-generation 
parking features described above, which were 
introduced with the platform, build on Aptiv’s 
deep experience developing and manufacturing 
industry-leading automotive radar systems. 
Together with our Satellite Architecture, this 
platform allows OEMs to implement scalable, 
integrated ADAS capabilities in a modular, flexible 
and cost-effective way for increasingly intelligent 
real-time sensing and decision-making. 
Aptiv’s system approach to vehicle automation, 
which spans parking, ADAS cruising and 
ultimately autonomous driving, brings together 
a full safety package, a comprehensive sensor 
fusion platform, and access to extensive driving 
data. With a detailed road map and proven 
solutions on the market, we are able to partner 
with OEMs for parking automation and beyond.
Parking assistance is increasingly not just a convenience feature but a part 
of the continuum of vehicle automation, subject to all the real-world safety 
demands imposed on this technology.
ADVANCED PARKING
6

ABOUT THE AUTHORS
Walter K. Kosiak
Engineering Manager, Advanced Safety Global Products
Walt Kosiak has spent his career at Aptiv innovating in the fields of integrated circuit design, passive 
safety systems, active safety and driver assistance, and automated vehicles. His areas of expertise 
include ADAS/AD feature/function algorithms, threat assessment and warning algorithms, radar and 
radar-vision fusion, adaptive cruise control systems, vehicle-to-everything communication, map-based 
electronic horizon technology, and rapid prototyping systems for automotive systems development. 
Walt is an inventor on 24 U.S. Patents and was a member of the team that completed the first U.S. 
coast-to-coast automated drive in 2015.
Gürhan Gümüssu
Parking Core Systems Lead Architect
Gürhan Gümüssu is responsible for leading and coordinating systems activities of Aptiv’s parking 
feature development in the Global Product Organization. He has been with Aptiv for four years, 
contributing to system teams on various projects and supporting business pursuits. Before joining 
Aptiv, he worked at a global automotive manufacturer as systems engineer.
Kamil Ostrowski
Technical Program Manager, Active Safety Algorithm Development
Dr. Kamil Ostrowski leads the software development activities for parking at Aptiv. In his seven years 
at the company, he has helped successfully launch products related to radar, vision and features for 
multiple customers. Previously, he worked for a U.K. OEM and in the railway industry. Kamil holds a 
doctoral degree from the University of Liverpool, U.K., with a research focus on advanced control 
algorithms for the powertrain domain. He is currently pursuing an executive MBA at Poznan University 
of Economics and Business.
LEARN MORE AT APTIV.COM/PARKING  →
ADVANCED PARKING
7
