 
7
IV
April 2019
https://doi.org/10.22214/ijraset.2019.4318

International Journal for Research in Applied Science & Engineering Technology (IJRASET) 
                                                                                           ISSN: 2321-9653; IC Value: 45.98; SJ Impact Factor: 6.887 
                                                                                                                Volume 7 Issue IV, Apr 2019- Available at www.ijraset.com 
 
 
 
 
 
1752
©IJRASET: All Rights are Reserved 
Design and Modelling of Wrong Way Warning 
Sreeraj S 
Software Engineer, Continental Automotive Components Pvt Ltd, India 
Abstract: Driving through the wrong way on road has been a constantly harassing traffic safety issue everywhere in the world.  
Wrong way or Ghost drivers cause hundreds of fatalities each year in Europe or North America. Often these drivers are not 
conscious of their dangerousness. The best way to prevent accidents is to warn these drivers once they enter a wrong way.  This 
paper talks about the architecture and functional flow of a warning generating system which detects the entry of vehicle into a 
road where a ‘No Entry’ sign is kept and provides an acoustic warning. The system is modelled in Matlab-Simulink. This model 
takes input data from different ECUs in the vehicle and checks whether the vehicle entered a wrong way or not.  
Keywords: Advanced Driver Assistance System (ADAS), WWW (Wrong Way Warning), No Entry Sign, NE gate, Subsystem 
I. INTRODUCTION 
Most road accidents occurred due to the human error.  Advanced driver-assistance systems (ADAS) are systems developed to 
automate, adapt and enhance vehicle systems for safety and better driving [1]. The automated system which is provided by ADAS to 
the vehicle is proven to reduce road fatalities, by minimizing the human error. Safety features are designed to avoid collisions and 
accidents by offering technologies that alert the driver to potential problems, or to avoid collisions by implementing safeguards and 
taking over control of the vehicle. Systems such as electronic stability control, anti-lock brakes, lane departure warning, adaptive 
cruise control and traction control are some available features of ADAS. ADAS relies on inputs from multiple data sources, 
including automotive imaging, LiDAR, radar, image processing, computer vision, and in-car networking. Additional inputs are 
possible from other sources separate from the primary vehicle platform, such as other vehicles, referred to as Vehicle-to-
vehicle (V2V), or Vehicle-to-Infrastructure (such as mobile telephony or wifi data network) systems. 
Wrong way crashes are often head-on collisions that are more likely to produce serious injuries and fatalities.  Typically, offenders 
are confused, distracted, or intoxicated drivers who tend to keep their eyes on the road directly in front of them often not seeing 
roadside warning signals and signs. Drivers who are tired, confused by poor road signs, or driving in bad weather can take the 
wrong turn, only to find they have put themselves and other people on the motorway in real danger Driving the wrong way in one-
way traffic or on the wrong side of the road factored into over 3 percent of all fatal crashes in the US [3]. Wrong Way Warning or 
WWW is a warning/alert system which notify the driver in case he or she drives in wrong way road. Thus, WWW can also be added 
as a new feature in the ADAS technology as it also assists driver for safe driving. In the case of signs imposing access restrictions, 
through the wrong-way driver warning function an acoustic warning is emitted together with a visual warning in the instrument 
cluster – making an effective contribution towards helping to prevent serious accidents caused by wrong-way drivers. system relies 
on a windshield-mounted camera to pick up Do Not Enter or Wrong Way signs and pairs it with data from the car's navigation 
system. If the car starts driving against the flow of traffic, it fires off visible and audible warnings for the driver [2]. Unfortunately, 
the system stops short of intervening or stopping the car from traveling the wrong way. As in starting stage, the system is modelled 
to react to the sign conventions in European countries like Austria, Germany, Switzerland etc. 
In following sections, the architecture and functional flow of the WWW model is explained.  
II. MODAL ARCHITECTURE AND FUNCTIONAL FLOW 
Top level of the model consists for four main subsystems as shown in Fig. 1. 
 
Fig. 1 First Level of WWW model having four main subsystems 

International Journal for Research in Applied Science & Engineering Technology (IJRASET) 
                                                                                           ISSN: 2321-9653; IC Value: 45.98; SJ Impact Factor: 6.887 
                                                                                                                Volume 7 Issue IV, Apr 2019- Available at www.ijraset.com 
 
 
 
 
 
1753
©IJRASET: All Rights are Reserved 
The model has 27 input signals and one output signal which is the warning signal which is of type Boolean. The input signals 
include camera data, vehicle data and GPS data. Camera data has all the signals providing several information regarding the traffic 
signs available in the camera field of view like sign id, sign type, sign lateral position, sign longitudinal position etc. Vehicle data 
include vehicle velocity, wheel yaw rate etc. GPS data include driving side information, country code, vehicle on the road or not, 
type of the road etc. 
The model execution sequence is from left to right. Subsystems from left to right are briefed below. 
A. Input Signal Conditioner 
All inputs are first fed to this subsystem. This Subsystem converts the input raw data into the form the next subsystems require. Also, 
it maintains each signal value within the upper and lower limit along with the prescribed datatype [4]. Also, it finds the distance 
covered by vehicle from the vehicle velocity information. 
B. Gate Detection 
In European countries a No Entry road is identified by two No Entry signs placed on two sides of the road to make a No Entry gate. 
The NE (No Entry) gate is present at the beginning of a road if the road is a one way. The actual function of WWW model is to 
detect an NE gate and check whether the vehicle crossed the gate or not. So, this is the core subsystem of this model. The input of 
this subsystem is the output of Input Signal Conditioner. This subsystem has eight subsystems inside it and the functionality of each 
block is briefed below. 
1) Sign Type Filter: The input is sign type signal information of different sign types like Speed limit, Stop sign, No entry etc. This 
subsystem checks for only the No Entry sign and passes all other information like position, status, sign confidence etc only for a 
NE sign. In a particular sample time, if there is no NE sign present, no calculations will be executed in the model and all the 
internal variables in the model will be set to zero [4]. 
2)  Gate Building: This subsystem checks for pairs of NE sign and if an NE sign pair is available, it checks for the distance 
between the two NE signs based on the position information of the sign. If distance is within the prescribed limits, this 
functional block identifies that NE pair as an NE gate [4]. 
3) Driving Path Memory: Once a NE gate is detected, this subsystem will hold all the information related to both the NE signs till 
the vehicle covers a specified distance. This distance can be calibrated [4]. 
4) Determine Quality: This block will set the output if confidence value of both the NE signs is above 0.6. Confidence value 
varies from 0 to 1 which relates the clarity of the captured sign [4].  
5) Driving Path Calculation: From the time ‘Gate building’ subsystem detects a gate this subsystem updates the current and 
previous position of the vehicle in every cycle till ‘Driving Path Memory’ subsystem resets its output [4]. 
6)  Vehicle Crosses Gate: Based on the inputs from ‘Driving Path Memory’, ‘Determine Quality’ and ‘Driving path calculation’ 
subsystems, this subsystem will check every cycle that the vehicle crossed the NE gate or not [4]. 
7) WWW Turn Detection: The "Turn_Detection" uses the yaw rate to determine if the vehicle is currently driving in a left turn, 
straight or in a right turn and sends this information to the "Warning_Generator" subsystem [4]. 
8) Street Type Detection: This subsystem uses the GPS data to determine whether the vehicle has approached a highway entry and 
sends this information to the "Warning_Generator" subsystem [4]. An NE gate is expected to be present at beginning of a 
highway. 
C. Warning Generator 
Warning Generator subsystem [4] sets the Warning Required boolean output to one if the below conditions are true. 
1) Vehicle crossed an NE gate. 
2) Vehicle approached a high way entry. 
3) WWW feature should be enabled by the user. This is an input signal to the model. 
4) Vehicle should not be in a construction area. 
5) Country code should be any one which is specified in the model.  
6) Vehicle should not be driving reverse. 
Information mentioned in point numbers 4 and 5 are available in the inputs provided by GPS. 
 
 

International Journal for Research in Applied Science & Engineering Technology (IJRASET) 
                                                                                           ISSN: 2321-9653; IC Value: 45.98; SJ Impact Factor: 6.887 
                                                                                                                Volume 7 Issue IV, Apr 2019- Available at www.ijraset.com 
 
 
 
 
 
1754
©IJRASET: All Rights are Reserved 
D. Output Signal Conditioner 
Once a warning is generated by ‘Warning generator’, this subsystem will set the output to one and hold it either for a predefined 
time or until the user acknowledges it from the IPC (Instrument Cluster Panel). The resetting mode can be calibrated by boolean 
variable in the software. If calibration variable is 1, Reset from IPC mode will be active else Reset after specified time mode will be 
active [4]. 
III. FUNCTIONAL ANALYSIS 
Keeping the WWW feature enabled, the model was tested in MIL testing environment by feeding two NE signs and vehicle allowed 
to cross the NE gate. The sign type value for NE sign is 18. So, a warning is expected to be generated once the vehicle crosses the 
gate. Model was calibrated to ‘Warning Hold for Time’ mode so that warning will sustain for 5 secs which is specified in the model. 
Test result is captured in Fig.2 . 
 
Fig. 2 Plot showing the input and output 
As shown in the above plot, at time = 0.5sec vehicle crosses the NE gate formed by the two NE signs detected. This results in 
setting of the signal ‘Warning Required’ to one for that cycle. It triggered WWW warning output to one which is held for 5 secs as 
expected.  
IV. CONCLUSION 
Wrong Way Warning uses a wind screen mounted camera which look for the traffic signs and detects the No Entry signs. It also 
takes information from the car’s navigation system. It provides visual and audible alerts to driver once the car goes into a wrong 
way. This system is aimed to warn drivers before they become a risk to themselves and others. For autonomous vehicles this 
technology can be extended so that the car should not enter a Wrong way. 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
JIAN Xing, “Evaluation of Roadside Wrong-Way Warning Systems with Different Types of Sensors”, in Journal of Traffic and Transportation Engineering, 
vol 4, pp. 155 – 166, March 2016. 
[2] 
S. Haendeler, A. Lewandowski and C. Wietfeld, "Passive Detection of Wrong Way Drivers on Motorways Based on Low Power Wireless 
Communications," 2014 IEEE 79th Vehicular Technology Conference (VTC Spring), Seoul, 2014, pp. 1-5.  
[3] 
Pour-Rouholamin, M., Zhou, H., Zhang, B., & Turochy, R. E. (2016). Comprehensive Analysis of Wrong-Way Driving Crashes on Alabama 
Interstates. Transportation Research Record, 2601(1), 50–58. 
[4] 
FORD Requirement documents 
 

 
