Advanced Driver Assistance Systems:
A Cost-Eﬀective Implementation of the 
Lane Departure Warning System
www.lnttechservices.com

Table of Contents
Abstract  
03
Introduction  
03
Solution Overview 
03
Project outcome 
06
Conclusion 
06
References 
06

ABSTRACT
INTRODUCTION
A lane departure warning system (LDWS) is deﬁned as system that warns the driver when an unintentional lane 
departure is about to occur. This system can assist drivers to maintain proper driving within the lane and also 
warn the driver when the vehicle is departing from current lane so that driver is alerted to take appropriate 
action. This system comes under application of ADAS. 
LDWS monitors the position of vehicle with respect to boundary. When the vehicle is in danger of leaving the lane 
unintentionally, since the driver is not paying full attention to the road ahead, the system delivers the warning to 
driver. 
L&T Technology Services has developed a Vision-based Lane Departure Warning System (LDWS) for intelligent 
Advanced Driver Assistance Systems applications. An important component of ADAS is evaluation of sequences of 
images recorded with real time camera mounted on moving vehicle. Sequence of images gives information about 
the automotive environment which has to be analyzed to support the driver. 
This paper focuses on the implementation carried out for Cost eﬀective LDWS that can be applied for Low and 
Medium range vehicles. This paper also talks about the Veriﬁcation of the developed algorithms using live videos 
as well as a Simulator. 
With the advent of requirement to provide Advanced Driver Assistance Systems in Mid-and-Low Cost Car 
segments, usage of cost-eﬀective Sensors has become imperative. Usually, High-end Cars have Radar, Lidar and 
similar systems to implement ADAS. 
At L&T Technology Services, we have come up with a cost eﬀective and optimized methodology, so that our 
system can be adopted by low and medium range vehicles. Also we have simulated our system with extremely 
adverse scenarios in order to make sure it will be robust in any climate. 
Cameras are a suitable solution for this kind of requirement, even when Cameras are used, usage of Monocular 
single Cameras prove the most challenging but also turn out to be economical and thus, have a cost-advantage.
SOLUTION OVERVIEW
To demonstrate our system, we developed a prototype which completely depends on image processing 
algorithms. To analyze the computer vision, image processing algorithms are necessary. All algorithms are 
developed in-house with minimum dependency on OpenCV — which is an open source computer vision library 
by Intel.
The following is the block diagram of the Lane Departure Warning System (LDWS):
Fig. 1: Block diagram of LDWS
Lane departure Warning system
ROI cropping 
Image 
enhancement 
Edge 
detection 
Line ﬁtting
Elimination
Lane 
departure 
warning 
03
PAGE
L&T TECHNOLOGY SERVICES 

2.1 Development 
At L&T Technology Services, we follow the V model for S/W development life cycle. With reference to IEEE Papers, 
suitable algorithms are selected. Selection of the algorithm is done not only based on theoretical reference but 
also based on the trial and error method, in which execution time & performance factors play a major role. 
Tools used to develop our algorithm are MS Visual studio 2012, OpenCV library, Eclipse Helios IDE. 
Algorithms developed in-house: 
• Region of Interest 
• Median Blur 
• Sobel Edge detection
• Hough Transformation 
• Lane Departure warning calculation
2.2 Overview of Algorithm 
The OpenCV methodology is used to fetch frames from video, to convert the frame into matrix. 
(i) Image Enhancement 
     • First step involves selecting Region of Interest so that only core part of image is only processed. 
• Raw image is blurred using median blur to remove salt and pepper noise. 
• Then it is converted to HSV Plane to concentrate only on yellow and white colors in the image. 
(ii) Edge Detection 
Edge detection plays a vital role in Lane departure warning system, through which lanes are detected. 
The algorithm adopted for this process is the canny edge detection algorithm. To make the output more precise, 
morphological operations are carried out over edge detected output. 
(iii) Line Fitting 
Once the edges are detected, the image should undergo Hough transformation in order to detect the lines. 
These detected lines are ﬁtted back to the original image. 
(iv)Departure warning estimation 
With reference to detected lines, parameters and other factors like car width, Lane width, Position of car, vehicle’s 
departure is calculated. Once the value exceeds the threshold value, appropriate warnings are issued via HMI. 
2.3 Departure Warning 
Once the vehicle crosses the threshold value, departure warnings are issued. Depending on the driver’s 
convenience, one of the following type of warnings are issued. 
a. Steering Vibration 
b. Audible alert 
c. Visible LED Blink
Following are the pictograms that will be displayed in HMI once the vehicle departs the lane. 
Fig. 2: When the vehicle is safely driving inside lanes
Fig. 3: When the vehicle is about to cross the Left lane
Fig.4 : When the vehicle is about to cross the Right Lane
Fig. 5: When the vehicle has departed from the lane completely
04
PAGE
L&T TECHNOLOGY SERVICES 

2.4 Avoiding False Alarm 
To avoid false warnings during intended lane departures, additional information is necessary. 
The following intended departures are considered: 
• Lane changes which are announced by the driver using the blinker, 
• Emergency maneuvers with brake and high steering activity, 
Before changing a lane, drivers are obliged to set the blinker. So, if the blinker is set while departing the lane, 
warnings are suppressed. 
If the driver brakes, he already reacts to some situation and is most likely aware of the situation.
Additional warnings would be disturbing in such cases and are, therefore, suppressed. The same argument holds 
if there is a high steering activity.
2.5 Veriﬁcation of Algorithm 
The developed algorithms are validated using simulated scenarios before testing them on the ﬁeld. The following 
are some of the scenarios: 
2.6 Veriﬁcation System Set-up 
• PC with 8 GB Graphics card 
• 2 Monitors 
• Logitech Game joystick set up 
• Real time simulator game 
In this set-up, the ﬁrst monitor displays the input simulated video (fast-paced game to simulate real-life 
scenarios). The second monitor is used to display the processed output along with the associated warnings. 
 
Fig.6 Various scenarios of LDWS
S.No   
i.
ii.
iii.
iv.
Description
Subject vehicle is 
about to depart from
the left side of the 
double solid lane 
Subject vehicle is 
about to depart 
from the Right Lane
Subject vehicle is 
about to depart from
the Right Lane of 
the curved roadways
Subject vehicle is 
approaching a 
jersey barrier 
instead of the 
Lane marking
Figure
05
PAGE
L&T TECHNOLOGY SERVICES 

In this paper, a cost-eﬀective lane departure warning system using Monocular camera is presented. The lane 
departure method is improved by ROI segmentation technique and color based lane detection. Monocular 
camera parameters like focal length, intrinsic and extrinsic parameters are used for measuring the distance 
between the lanes, position of the vehicle, based on which decision for left or right departure is derived. In this 
way accuracy in issuance of warning is improved and false warnings are reduced. 
With this approach, L&T Technology Services have been able to oﬀer an improved, optimized low-cost solution to 
Lane Departure Warning System. We also have the infrastructure to verify and validate the developed product, 
test the performance of algorithms, carry out Competitor Benchmarking and such other exercises enabling the 
customer to gain a competitive edge in an already mature market. 
PROJECT OUTCOMES 
CONCLUSION
OUTPUT SAMPLES 
Fig. 7: Snapshot of Veriﬁcation system set-up
Fig.8 A vehicle is driven in between lanes without any violation in a “day” scenario 
(i) Normal Day Scenario
(ii)Night Scenario
(iii)Shadow Scenario
(iv) Simulated output
Fig. 9 A vehicle is driven in between lanes without any violation in a “night” scenario
Fig. 10 A vehicle is driven  in between  lanes without any violation i
n a “shadow” scenario
Fig. 11 A vehicle is driven in between lanes without any violation in 
“shadow” scenario
06
PAGE
L&T TECHNOLOGY SERVICES 

REFERENCES 
i. National Highway Traﬃc Safety Administration, http://www.nhtsa.dot.gov/ 
ii. Robert Laganiere “OpenCV 2 Computer vision Application programming cook book”, Aug 2013. 
iii. Bruno Keymolen “Theory of Hough Transformation” May 2013. 
iv. Probabilistic and non-probabilistic Hough transforms: overview and comparisons, by Heikki, Petri, Lei Xu. 
07
PAGE
L&T TECHNOLOGY SERVICES 
ABOUT L&T TECHNOLOGY SERVICES
L&T Technology Services is a subsidiary of Larsen & Toubro with a focus in the engineering services space, 
partnering with a large number of Fortune 500 companies globally. We oﬀer design and development solutions 
through the entire product development chain, across various industries such as Industrial Products, Medical 
Devices, Transportation, Telecom and Hi-tech and the Process Industry. We also oﬀer solutions in the areas of 
Mechanical Engineering Services, Embedded Systems & Applications, Engineering Process Services, Product 
Lifecycle Management, Engineering Analytics, Power Electronics and Machine-to-Machine and the 
Internet-of-Things (IoT).

www.lnttechservices.com
