Whitepaper:
ADAS (Advanced Driver 
Assistance Systems) – 
attraction or distraction? 
Do you know what they all are 
and what they do to help?
drivetech.co.uk
With grateful thanks for a significant contribution from 
Dr. Lisa Dorn, Research Director at DriverMetrics

Introduction 
Advanced driver-assistance systems (popularly abbreviated to 
“ADAS”) are systems designed to help the driver in an increasingly 
technology-assisted mobile world. 
More and more road vehicles have built-in driver assistance 
technology either fitted as standard or offered as after-market 
fitment options. Of course, many of them may be optionally turned 
on or off by the driver, but by default it is likely that many are on as 
the standard setting.
The endgame might be the fully autonomous (driverless) vehicle, 
but in the meantime, driver assistance systems are intended mainly 
to improve safety on the road. However, as they appear increasingly 
on new vehicles, does the driver really understand them, their 
benefits and their best use?
Interestingly, in a JD Power 2019 U.S. Tech Experience Index 
Study, it was noted that some alerts on ADAS are so annoying 
or bothersome that many drivers disable the systems and may 
even try to avoid them on future car purchases. Confusion and 
frustration are commonly cited.
As we move to more screen based technology interfaces, what is 
the difference between the use of a modern smartphone in-vehicle 
and the increasing adoption of large single tablet computer style 
screens with variable functions that appear depending on mode –
 
versus the fixed location of more traditional buttons to control key 
aspects of the vehicle to help minimise distraction.
And what are the distinct behavioural and attitudinal impacts 
on drivers? We are exceptionally grateful for a collaborative 
input to this paper from Dr Lisa Dorn of Cranfield University and 
DriverMetrics who assesses this area with a helpful summary of 
academic studies and reports, and some key observations about 
the prospective development of the driver training curriculum.

The Road Safety Challenge 
Safety features are designed to avoid collisions by offering 
technologies that alert the driver to potential hazards by 
implementing safeguards and taking over control of the vehicle. 
Adaptive features may automate lights, provide adaptive cruise 
control and collision avoidance, pedestrian crash avoidance 
mitigation (PCAM), incorporate satnav/traffic warnings, connect 
to smartphones, alert drivers to other cars or dangers, lane 
departure warning system, automatic lane centering, or show 
what is in blind spots.
Many drivers are becoming increasingly reliant on ADAS systems 
which in frequent cases may not even be working after the fitted 
vehicle has been involved in a harsh collision, compromising their 
safety against what may be a backdrop of poor basic driving 
skills. Drivers often misunderstand or misuse the systems and, in 
particular, may over-rely on them, which can lead to more crashes 
ironically (imagine a scenario where one’s regular vehicle has 
parking sensors front and rear, and then an older vehicle is driven 
without these aids. It can be difficult to revert to parking without 
assistance – especially when these skills can fade over time).
Professional and accurate recalibration of ADAS (for example after 
a collision or major electronics investigation work) is important 
because, for example, an un-calibrated replacement windscreen 
could fail to warn drivers of potential road hazards in a timely 
manner. Even just a tiny inaccuracy in the position of a windscreen 
camera can significantly impair the effectiveness of one or more 
ADAS systems. This is an issue that the insurance industry, 
and the wider automotive sector are facing. As vehicle servicing 
and maintenance becomes significantly transitioned from 
mechanical and engineering expertise to precision electronic device 
calibration, it inevitably poses reliability, liability and warranty issues.
Whilst the dynamics of road safety is complex combining human 
behaviour, road infrastructure, road use regulations and policing,
 
and increasing vehicle technology – notably including ADAS, it is 
interesting, if not concerning, that after a period of virtually static 
recorded annual road deaths and serious injuries (Department for 
Transport - DfT), the most recent annual provisional figures indicate 
a slight worsening of the road death figures.
Thatcham Research hold an eminent research 
position in the motor industry – with the specific aim 
of containing or reducing the cost of motor insurance 
claims while maintaining safety standards. Richard 
Billyeald, Thatcham Research Chief Technical Officer, 
comments: ‘‘The whole industry needs to work together 
to make sure ADAS repairs are safe and vehicles are 
returned to the road quickly and efficiently. Equipment 
suppliers must ensure that verifiable evidence of a 
successful calibration is provided. Repairers must 
invest in training to ensure competent persons are 
reinstating ADAS safely. And Vehicle Manufacturers 
must provide ADAS fitment data and consistent advice 
around which repair scenarios will result in successful 
ADAS calibration.’’

Systems Range 
Typically, ADAS relies on inputs from multiple data sources, 
including automotive imaging, LiDAR*, radar, image processing, 
computer vision, and in-car networking. Additional inputs are 
possible from other sources separate from the primary vehicle 
platform, such as other vehicles, referred to as Vehicle-to-Vehicle 
(V2V), or Vehicle-to-Infrastructure (such as mobile telephony or  
Wi-Fi data network) systems.
*LiDAR – stands for Light Detection and Ranging, and is a remote 
sensing method that uses light in the form of a pulsed laser to 
measure ranges and distance to a target).
The range of different systems is wide and growing! Just some 
are listed here and we’ve highlighted a few of the more popular 
ones including a brief indicative description.
Don’t forget DriveTech can help provide driver training 
for your business drivers to include knowledge and 
a full appreciation of the systems prevalent in their own 
vehicles.
 
Increasingly Popular & Prevalent ADAS Systems:
Adaptive Cruise Control (ACC)
Switch on the adaptive cruise control and put in the maximum 
speed you want to drive and the distance at which you’re 
comfortable following other cars. As long as there’s no one in front 
of you the car will maintain that speed without any driver input. 
When you inevitably come across a slower vehicle, or even stop and 
go traffic, the vehicle will automatically brake and accelerate to keep 
up with traffic.
CON: This system tries to always keep the pre-set distance to the 
car in front of you. This can often lead to significant braking and 
acceleration, which can create a poor road usage capacity, and 
might also increase fuel consumption.
Anti-lock braking system
Possibly one of the earlier ADAS introductions, an anti-lock  
braking system (ABS) is a safety anti-skid braking system used on 
aircraft and on land vehicles, such as cars, motorcycles, trucks, and 
buses. ABS operates by preventing the wheels from locking  
up during braking, thereby maintaining tractive contact with the road 
surface.

Automatic Parking
Automatic parking is an autonomous car-manoeuvring system 
that moves a vehicle from a traffic lane into a parking spot to 
perform parallel, perpendicular, or angle parking. The automatic 
parking system aims to enhance the comfort and safety of driving 
in constrained environments where much attention and experience 
is required to steer the car. The parking manoeuvre is achieved 
by means of coordinated control of the steering angle and speed 
which takes into account the actual situation in the environment to 
ensure collision-free motion within the available space.
Automotive navigation system with typically GPS* and 
TMC* for providing up-to-date traffic information.
An automotive navigation system is part of the vehicle controls or a 
third-party add-on used to find direction. It typically uses a satellite 
navigation device to get its position data which is then correlated to 
a position on a road. When directions are needed routing can 
be calculated. On the fly traffic information can be used to adjust 
the route. *GPS - Global positioning system. *TMC – Traffic Message Channel
Automotive Night Vision
An automotive night vision system uses a thermographic camera 
to increase a driver’s perception and seeing distance in darkness 
or poor weather beyond the reach of the vehicle’s headlights. This 
may help to highlight humans and other objects that wouldn’t 
otherwise be seen as clearly with just normal vehicle headlights. 
Such systems are offered as optional equipment on certain 
premium vehicles.
Blind Spot Monitor
The blind spot monitor is a vehicle-based sensor device that 
detects other vehicles located to the driver’s side and rear. 
Warnings can be visual, audible, vibrating, or tactile.
Blind spot monitors are an option that may do more than monitor 
the sides and rear of the vehicle. They may also include “Cross 
Traffic Alert”, “which alerts drivers backing out of a parking space 
when traffic is approaching from the sides.
CON: Every system will have serious consequences when not 
operating properly, but with the blind spot information system the 
consequences are catastrophic. When drivers count on the proper 
function of the system in high speed traffic situations if the system 
is broken people will be seriously injured or even worse.
Collision Avoidance System (Pre-Crash System)
Also referred to as forward collision warning (FCW), or collision 
mitigating system, it typically uses RADAR or LiDAR or camera 
(or a combination of these technologies) to detect an imminent 
crash and works to avoid the impact completely, or at least reduce 
the magnitude of impact – normally by automatically cancelling 
acceleration and applying the brakes. GPS sensors can detect 
fixed dangers such as an approaching stop sign at a dangerous 
T-junction through a location database.
CON: Collision mitigation is based on algorithms that are inserted 
by the developer of the system. These algorithms cannot always 
represent all the possible things that could go wrong in traffic.
Crosswind Stabilisation
Crosswind stabilisation is among the relatively new ADAS, aiming 
to compensate for strong crosswinds. It uses sensors to detect 
forces acting on the vehicle through side wind gusts – be it on 
a bridge or when overtaking a truck. The system’s response 
also takes account of vehicle speed, vehicle load and steering 
characteristics of the driver. Brakes are applied to the wheels on 
the side of the vehicle facing the wind, depending on the situation, 
and counteract the side wind interference.
Cruise Control
Another increasingly prevalent/standard fit, cruise control 
(sometimes known as speed control or autocruise, or tempomat in 
some countries) is a system that automatically controls the speed 
of a motor vehicle. The system is a servomechanism that takes 
over the throttle of the car to maintain a steady speed as set by the 
driver.
Dashcam
Increasingly popular, mainly as a standalone accessory for 
windscreen (and/or rear screen) affixing, the ability for dashcam 
systems to help record on road events might be regarded as 
an assistance system, not so much to assist live driving but to 
record events in the event of an insurance issue or similar on road 
incident. It can be argued that the mere presence of a recording 
device will influence many drivers to conform to good driving 
practice and observe the Highway Code. Some models include 
warnings of ‘hazards’ or landmarks ahead.

Driver Drowsiness Detection
Driver drowsiness detection is a car safety technology which helps 
prevent accidents caused by the driver getting drowsy. Various 
studies have suggested that around 20% of all road accidents are 
fatigue-related, up to 50% on certain roads. See the AA Drowsy 
Driver campaign video here 
www.drivetech.co.uk/news-and-resources/aa-trust-supported-
by-drivetech-launches-new-drows
Some of the current systems learn driver patterns and can detect 
when a driver is becoming drowsy. One example of the benefits 
of lane departure warning is to warn when the driver becomes 
tired or is distracted. A question that rises is that the system 
might cause this inattention just by making the driver aware that 
something is controlling him.
Driver Monitoring System
The Driver Monitoring System, also known as Driver Attention 
Monitor, is a vehicle safety system first introduced by Toyota 
in 2006. The system uses infrared sensors to monitor driver 
attentiveness. Specifically, the Driver Monitoring System includes 
a CCD camera placed on the steering column which is capable of 
eye tracking via infrared LED detectors. If the driver is not paying 
attention to the road ahead and a dangerous situation is detected, 
the system will warn the driver with flashing lights and warning 
sounds. If no action is taken, the vehicle will apply the brakes (a 
warning alarm will sound followed by a brief automatic application 
of the braking system). 
Electric Vehicle Warning Sounds Used In Hybrids 
& Plug-In Electric Vehicles
Electric vehicle warning sounds are sounds designed to alert 
pedestrians to the presence of electric drive vehicles such as hybrid 
electric vehicles (HEVs), plug-in hybrid electric vehicles (PHEVs), 
and all-electric vehicles (EVs) travelling at low speeds. Warning 
sound devices were deemed necessary by some government 
regulators because vehicles operating in all-electric mode produce 
less, if not virtually no, noise than traditional combustion engine 
vehicles and can make it more difficult for pedestrians, the blind, 
cyclists, and others, to be aware of their presence.
Emergency Driver Assistant
Emergency Assist is a driver assistance system that monitors driver 
behaviour by observing delays between the use of the accelerator 
and the brake. Once a preset threshold of time has been exceeded 
the system will take control of the vehicle in order to bring it to a safe 
stop. This is on the assumption that the driver has, for example, 
fallen asleep at the wheel.
Forward Collision Warning (FCW)
A collision avoidance system, also known as a pre-crash system, 
forward collision warning system, or collision mitigating system, is 
a vehicle safety system designed to prevent or reduce the severity 
of a collision. It uses radar (all-weather) and sometimes laser 
(LIDAR) and camera (employing image recognition) to detect an 
imminent crash. GPS sensors can detect fixed dangers such as 
approaching stop signs through a location database
Hill Descent Control
When the driver is descending a hill at a slow speed, by selecting 
Hill Descent Control (a dashboard button typically) the vehicle will 
be restrained to not allow gravity to naturally accelerate the vehicle 
downhill. When on, the vehicle will descend using the anti-lock 
braking system (ABS) to control each wheel’s speed. If the vehicle 
accelerates without driver input, the system will automatically 
apply the brakes to slow down to the desired vehicle speed. 
Cruise control buttons can adjust the speed to a comfortable 
level. Applying pressure to the accelerator or brake pedal will 
override the HDC system when the driver requires.
Hill Start Assist
This feature can prevent roll back on an incline by holding the 
brakes while you switch between the brake and acceleration 
pedals. Some versions can also prevent your car from rolling 
forward on a decline. Sensors in the vehicle are used to detect 
when a vehicle is on an incline. The hill start assist maintains the 
brake pressure for a set period of time as you switch from the 
brakes to the accelerator pedal. Once you press the accelerator, it 
releases the brake. In cars with manual transmission that have this 
feature, the hill start assist will also maintain brake pressure until 
the driver releases the clutch.

Intelligent speed adaptation or intelligent speed advice (ISA):
Intelligent speed adaptation (ISA), also known as alerting, and 
intelligent authority, is any system that ensures that vehicle speed 
does not exceed a safe or legally enforced speed. In case of 
potential speeding, a human driver can be alerted, or the speed 
reduced automatically. Intelligent speed adaptation uses information 
about the road to determine the required speed. Information can 
be obtained from knowledge of the vehicle position, taking into 
account speed limits known for the position, and by interpreting 
road features such as signs. ISA systems are designed to detect 
and alert a driver when a vehicle has entered a new speed zone, or 
when different speed limits are in force according to time of day and 
conditions.
Intersection Assistant
Junctions in cities can be major accident black spots. The collisions 
here can mostly be put down to driver distraction or misjudgement. 
Whereas humans often react too slowly, assistance systems are 
immune from the brief moment of human hesitation. The system 
monitors cross traffic in an intersection/road junction. If this 
anticipatory system detects a hazardous situation of this type, it 
prompts the driver to start emergency braking by activating visual 
and acoustic warnings and automatically engaging brakes.
Lane Centering
Lane centering, also known as auto steer, is a mechanism designed 
to keep a car centered in the lane, relieving the driver of the task of 
steering. Lane centering is similar to lane departure warning, but 
rather than warn the driver, or bouncing the car away from the lane 
edge, it keeps the car centered in the lane.
Lane Departure Warning System (LDW): 
A lane departure warning system is a mechanism designed to warn 
the driver when the vehicle begins to move out of its lane (unless 
a turn signal is on in that direction) on motorways and arterial 
roads. These systems are designed to minimize accidents by 
addressing the main causes of collisions: driver error, distractions 
and drowsiness.
Parking Sensor
Parking sensors are proximity sensors for road vehicles designed to 
alert the driver of obstacles while parking. These systems use either 
electromagnetic or ultrasonic sensors and their signal (sound and 
sometimes visual indicators) tend to accelerate in frequency and 
volume when the obstacle becomes nearer.
Pedestrian Protection System
These are developing all the time but might consist of redesigns to 
the vehicle itself (e.g. bumper, bonnet and windshield pillars, and/or 
the provision of exterior airbag systems to minimise the damage to 
pedestrians on impact.
Rain Sensor
An automatic sensor that detects rain on the windscreen and 
activates the wipers without necessary manual intervention by the 
driver.
Surround View System
Omniview technology (also known as “surround view” or “bird view 
technology”) is a vehicle parking assistant technology that is a 
vehicle parking assistant technology that is designed to help drivers 
park a vehicle in a small or confined space.

Tyre Pressure Monitoring
A tyre-pressure monitoring system (TPMS) is an electronic system 
designed to monitor the air pressure inside the pneumatic tyres on 
various types of vehicles. A TPMS reports real-time tyre-pressure 
information to the driver of the vehicle, either via a gauge, a 
pictogram display, or a simple low-pressure warning light.
Traffic Sign Recognition
Traffic-sign recognition (TSR) is a technology by which a vehicle is 
able to recognise the traffic signs put on the road e.g. “speed limit” 
or “children” or “turn ahead”. The technology is being developed 
by a variety of automotive suppliers. It uses image processing 
techniques to detect the traffic signs. The detection methods can 
be generally divided into colour-based, shape-based and learning 
based methods.
Turning Assistant
The system monitors opposing traffic when turning left at low 
speeds. In critical situations, it brakes the car. This is a common 
scenario at busy city intersections as well as on highways, where 
the speed limits are higher.
Vehicular Communication Systems
Vehicular communication systems are computer networks in 
which vehicles and roadside units are the communicating nodes, 
providing each other with information, such as safety warnings and 
traffic information. They can be effective in avoiding accidents and 
traffic congestion.
Wrong-Way Driving Warning
In the case of signs imposing access restrictions, through the 
wrong-way driver warning function an acoustic warning is emitted 
together with a visual warning in the instrument cluster.

Introduction 
As already highlighted in this paper, Advanced Driver Assistance 
Systems (ADAS) are defined as technologies which can assist 
drivers with relevant information (for example, a lane departure 
warning system) and can assume control over a single vehicle 
function (for example, an adaptive cruise control system) or a 
combined vehicle function (for example, an adaptive cruise control 
system combined with a lane centring system). These are labelled 
as vehicle automation levels 0, 1, and 2 by NHTSA (2013). ADAS 
is expected to improve safety by reducing human error. This is 
achieved by removing some elements of the driving task including 
increasing safety margins that would be larger than those tolerated 
by a human driver or reacting faster in dangerous situations than 
a human driver could. In its most simplistic form, a calculation of 
safety would just assume that these kinds of systems would reduce 
the number of crashes caused by the type of error which the 
system takes account of.
However, different systems offer different levels of safety 
improvements and some systems even appear to show unintended 
consequences and can have a detrimental effect on driving 
performance. Studies show that drivers change behaviour in 
response to new technology and the intended safety benefit is 
not always realised. Unwanted behavioural changes for Intelligent 
Speed Adaptation (ISA) show that drivers reduce their maximum 
speed but accept smaller gaps when merging and spend more
 
time at short headways (Comte, 2000). Drivers using Antilock 
Braking System (ABS) adapt their behaviour by driving faster in built 
up areas and wet road conditions (Sagberg, Fosser & Sätermo, 
1997); and increase their speed (Hoyes, Dorn, Desmond and 
Taylor, 1996). Studies have also found that vehicles fitted with ABS 
were significantly more likely to be involved in crashes fatal to their 
own occupants and were less likely to be involved in crashes fatal 
to occupants of other vehicles. Overall, antilock brakes seemed 
to have little effect on fatal crash involvement (Farmer et al, 1997; 
Farmer, 2001).
Behavioural Responses to 
Advanced Driver Assistance 
Systems
Dr. Lisa Dorn, Research Director 
at DriverMetrics

Behavioural Responses to 
Adaptive Cruise Control (ACC)
Studies investigating the effectiveness of ACC have also reported 
some surprising findings. ACC is a longitudinal support system that 
can not only maintain a chosen velocity as with Cruise Control, 
but also keep a safe distance to a lead vehicle. ACC has been 
commercially available since 1998 and the driver only has to steer 
while the system manages vehicle speed and distance to make 
it easier to comply with speed limits and to keep safe distances 
especially on long trips, predominantly on motorways and A-roads, 
requiring fewer speed changes. 
Whilst field studies have shown that ACC leads to increased 
distances towards leading cars and to following speed limits 
better, there is also strong evidence that drivers have difficulties 
keeping an adequate level of situation awareness which leads to 
prolonged response times in some situations. They may also shift 
their attention away from driving and engage in secondary tasks 
and attentional resources may be diminished by reduced workload 
(Young and Stanton, 2002). It appears that mental workload 
decreases because ACC takes over a part of the driving task and 
the driver withdraws their attention. This means that the driver has 
less capacity to observe relevant cues for hazards.
In a driving simulator study on a motorway with and without ACC, 
smaller headways were chosen with ACC compared with manual 
driving and all drivers drove faster with ACC (Hoedemaeker and 
Brookhuis, 1998). In the study by Törnros et al. (2002), drivers 
drove longer in the overtaking lane with ACC and the minimum 
time-to-collision was reduced. ACC can also encourage faster 
speeds on narrow curves and lead to poorer lane keeping 
performance (Buld and Krüger, 2002). Rudin-Brown and Parker 
(2004) found that while driving with ACC drivers performed better in 
a secondary task, but the response time to brake increased when 
a safety hazard was introduced. Cho et al. (2006) also found that 
drivers tended to shift their attention away from driving when they 
used ACC. Finally, when ACC fails and does not adapt speed
 
correctly, drivers have significantly longer reactions times than in 
similar situations when driving without ACC (Young and Stanton, 
2007). 
Stanton and Young found in a series of studies (Stanton et al., 
1997; Stanton and Young, 2000, 2005; Young and Stanton, 
2002a,b, 2004) that while a reduction of workload when driving 
with ACC might be described as a positive effect, situation 
awareness when driving with ACC is also reduced. Situation 
awareness is defined as “...the perception of the elements in the 
environment within a span of time and space, the comprehension 
of their meaning and the projection of their status in the near future” 
(Endsley, 1995, p. 36). As drivers rely on the ACC system they do 
not monitor the surrounding as carefully and lose some of their 
situation awareness.
In summary, ACC can lead to behavioural changes that can 
counteract the intended safety effect as drivers become less 
engaged in the driving task and more reliant on technology and 
adapt their behaviour and take greater risks in so doing. The 
evidence clearly shows then that driver behaviour is influenced 
when using various systems and that the driver assistance system 
is not always being used as planned by its designers. 

Delayed Skill Development 
and Skill Decay
Previous research has shown that drivers demonstrate lower levels 
of skill when using ADAS due to their adaptation to the assistance 
offered and the evidence suggests that these performance 
decrements can carry over into other driving task situations. The 
difference between the adaptation effect and the arrested skill 
development effect is that for adaptation, high skill has been 
achieved but is not applied, because the driver has learned a 
different behaviour. 
The adaptation effect is thus a more rapid effect than arrested 
skill. This can be seen in experiments where the effect is 
apparent between situations for the same drivers (Hoedemaeker 
& Brookhuis, 1998). As automation increases, drivers will have 
less opportunity to develop their driving skills, and therefore their 
driving experience and skills will not increase as fast compared with 
driving in fully manual mode. Delayed skill development will have 
the same kind of effect as skill decay but stems from a different 
source. Over-learned skills are less prone to decay but with regular 
fully autonomous driving, skill decay can be expected within a few 
months.
Our relationship with vehicles and how we drive for work then is 
changing. New technology in vehicles is being introduced with 
little understanding about its effect on driving for work. ADAS 
technology has many advantages, such as providing drivers with 
important information, relieving drivers by occasionally taking over 
parts of the driving task, and sometimes providing added control to 
aid drivers in critical situations. These advantages could potentially 
augment driver performance and reduce crash rates. This 
represents an opportunity for driver training to step up and deliver 
new structure and content.
Evolving the Driver Training 
Curriculum
The essential driving sub-tasks is evolving and using ADAS is quite 
different to the task taught in conventional driver training courses. 
First, speed control is often applied through instant adjustments of 
the cruise control settings on the steering wheel and this means 
that the instruments of control move from foot-pedals to hand 
operated buttons. Second, although steering is still applied through 
the wheel, lane-keeping assistance alters the characteristics of a 
driver’s response from the steering system, while warning systems 
add potentially distracting auditory elements too. ADAS also means 
that more driving subtasks are taken away and studies reported 
here have shown that this can lead to driver disengagement. Plus, 
with increasing automation driver skills will be lost and new skills will 
be needed. 
It’s clear that the driver needs to be trained differently for the task of 
driving than is currently the case. Driver training needs to address 
the requirements for driving in today’s vehicles so that drivers are 
prepared for full automation. Training will be required to upskill 
drivers and avoid the dangers of delayed skill development and skill 
decay when switching to manual mode in emergency situations 
or for driving as a leisure activity. Importantly, driver training must 
focus on how to ensure that drivers remain alert and vigilant whilst 
using ADAS. Given the behavioural responses discussed, training 
fleet drivers must take into account the impact of time pressure to 
complete schedules, deliveries and appointments on time whilst 
simultaneously using ADAS. How to avoid unwanted behavioural 
responses to in-vehicle systems must be part of the fleet driver 
training curriculum if ADAS is to realise its potential to improve road 
safety. 

Conclusions 
There is an increasing proliferation of ADAS on vehicles, many of 
which are sold as terrific breakthrough driver aids but are literally 
unknown or misunderstood by the vast majority of drivers acquiring 
and driving these vehicles. The tendency to abbreviate the names 
of many of these new assistance systems doesn’t help basic 
appreciation and understanding.
There is little if no explanation of these features and benefits at point 
of purchase, and therefore a driver gets behind the wheel of this 
new ‘fully loaded’ vehicle often not knowing what the additional 
sounds and indications mean, never mind how they can help keep 
the roads safer. This is more acceptable/forgiveable when users 
purchasing a state-of-the-art new computer only typically use about 
10% of the functionality available. It is a very different proposition 
when the new purchase is a “speeding bullet” with humans both 
inside and surrounding it.
This uncertainty around some new ADAS, and in fact confusion and 
annoyance, around some systems documented in the JD Power 
2019 U.S. Tech Experience Index (TXI) Study indicates that drivers 
get turned off, and then literally switch them off.
There is a body of academic study evidence provided here by 
Dr Lisa Dorn perversely indicating that human behaviour doesn’t 
always work the way the new ADAS designers and engineers 
envisaged and intended. In overall summary, the presence of a 
particular driver aid system can create a real false sense of security 
and infallibility – which is a very dangerous state when in control of a 
fast-moving vehicle.
The driver is still the single default owner of the safety imperative 
in a vehicle and should not feel that they have delegated this 
responsibility to “assistance” systems. The systems are there to 
assist – not override – and the driver must be clearly aware that he 
or she makes the final call for safety’s sake.

References 
Buld, S., Krüger, H.-P., 2002. Wirkungen von Assistenz und Automation auf 
Fahrerzustand und Fahrsicherheit – Projekt EMPHASIS (Effort-Management 
and Performance Handling in Sicherheitsrelevanten Situationen). IZVW, 
Würzburg. Available from: http://www.psychologie.uni-wuerzburg.de/
methoden/texte/ 2002 buld krueger Wirkungen von Assistenz und 
Automation.pdf.
Cho, J.H., Nam, H.K., Lee, W.S., 2006. Driver behaviour with adaptive cruise 
control. International Journal of Automotive Engineering 7 (5), 603–608.
Comte, S. L. (2000). New systems: New behaviour? Transportation Research 
Part F: Traffic Psychology and Behaviour, 3(2), 95–111.
Edworthy, J., Loxley, S., & Dennis, I. (1991). Improving auditory warning 
design: Relationship between warning sound parameters and perceived 
urgency.
Human Factors, 33, 205–232.
Endsley, M.R., 1995. Measurement of situation awareness in dynamic 
systems. Human Factors 37 (1), 65–84.
EPSRC. Engineering and Physical Sciences Research Council.
ESRC. Economic and Social Research Council.
Farmer, C. M. (2001). New evidence concerning fatal crashes of passenger 
vehicles before and after adding antilock braking systems. Accident Analysis 
and Prevention, 33, 361-369.
Farmer, C. M., Lund, A. K., Trempel, E. R., & Braver, A. R. (1997). Fatal 
crashes of passenger vehicles before and after adding antilock braking 
systems. Accident Analysis and Prevention, 29, 745-757.
Hoedemaeker, M., & Brookhuis, K. A. (1998). Behavioural adaptation to 
driving with an adaptive cruise control. Transportation Research Part F, 1, 
95-106.
Hoyes, T. W. Dorn, L. Desmond, P. A. and Taylor, D. R. (1996). Risk 
Homeostasis Theory: Utility and accident loss in a simulated driving task.  
Special issue; Risk homeostasis and risk assessment Safety Science, 22 
(1-3) pp 49-62.
JD Power 2019 U.S. Tech Experience Index (TXI) Study – August 2019; 
measures drivers’ experiences, usage and interaction with driver centric 
vehicle technology at 90 days of ownership.
NHTSA (2013). U.S. Department of Transportation Releases Policy on 
Automated Vehicle Development. 
 
Rudin-Brown, C. M., & Parker, H. A. (2004). Behavioural adaptations 
to adaptive cruise control (ACC): implications for preventive strategies. 
Transportation Research Part F, 7, 59-76.
Sagberg, F., Fosser, S., & Sätermo, I.-A. (1997). An investigation of 
behavioural adaptation to airbags and antilock brakes among taxi drivers. 
Accident Analysis and Prevention, 29, 293-302.
Stanton, N.A., Young, M.S., 2000. The Role of Mental Models in Using 
Adaptive Cruise Control. Paper Presented at the IEA 2000/HFES 2000 
Proceedings.
Stanton, N.A., Young, M.S., 2005. Driver behaviour with adaptive cruise 
control. Ergonomics 48 (10), 1294–1313.
Stanton, N.A., Young, M.S., McCaulder, B., 1997. Drive-by-wire: the case of 
driver workload and reclaiming control with adaptive cruise control. Safety 
Science 27 (2/3), 149–159.
Törnros, J., Nilsson, L., Östlund, J., Kircher, A., 2002. Effects of ACC 
on Driver Behaviour, Workload and Acceptance in Relation to Minimum 
Time Headway. Paper Presented at the 9th World Congress on Intelligent 
Transport Systems, Chicago.
Young, M.S., Stanton, N.A., 2002a. Attention and automation: new 
perspectives on mental underload and performance. Theoretical Issues in 
Ergonomics Science 3 (2), 178–194.
Young, M.S., Stanton, N.A., 2002b. Malleable attentional resources theory: a 
new explanation for the effects of mental underload on performance. Human 
Factors 44 (3), 365–375.
Young, M.S., Stanton, N.A., 2004. Taking the load off: investigations of 
how adaptive cruise control affects mental workload. Ergonomics 47 (9), 
1014–1035.
Young, M.S., Stanton, N.A., 2007. Back to the future: brake reaction times 
for manual and automated vehicles. Ergonomics 50 (1), 46–58.

drivetech.co.uk
About DriveTech 
DriveTech is the world leader in fleet risk and safety management, 
and driver training. It is also the UK’s largest provider of driver 
offender retraining courses.
With a track record built over the last 25 years, DriveTech now 
delivers fleet consultancy, driver assessment and training services in 
over 95 countries, in 35 languages through over 40 partners.
Our fleet solutions improve driver safety, reduce fleet running costs 
and ensure compliance with legal and duty of care responsibilities.
Our customers range from companies with small fleets through to 
large corporate customers where driver training is a core activity, 
an understanding of their sector required and a clear return on 
investment is demanded.
DriveTech is part of the Automobile Association.
About Dr Lisa Dorn 
& Driver Metrics
Dr Lisa Dorn is an Associate Professor of Driver Behaviour at 
Cranfield University and Research Director for DriverMetrics. Lisa 
has conducted research on driver behaviour for over 30 years and 
has won more than £2.5 million in research revenues as Principal 
Investigator. She has worked on a range of EU, EPSRC, ESRC 
and consultancy projects particularly focusing on behavioural 
interventions to reduce the risk of crash involvement for vulnerable 
road users. Currently, Lisa is Principal Investigator on a Horizon 
2020 Framework Programme for Research and Innovation funded 
by the European Commission called MeBeSafe (Measures for 
Behaving Safely in Traffic) to develop in-vehicle and infrastructure 
nudges towards safer road use.
DriverMetrics was established by Dr Dorn at Cranfield University 
in 2005, to make scientific research into employee driver safety 
more widely available.  Today, its portfolio of scientifically validated 
driver risk assessments, together with integrated eLearning and 
driver coaching interventions are used worldwide by hundreds of 
organisations including Unilever, Greyhound Bus, Shell and the 
emergency services. 
www.drivermetrics.com
Contact Us 
DriveTech UK
Fanum House, Basing View, Basingstoke 
Hampshire, RG21 4EA, UK
T	 01256 610907
E	 tellmemore@drivetech.co.uk.
DriveTech International
Fanum House, Basing View, Basingstoke 
Hampshire, RG21 4EA, UK
T	 +44 (0) 1256 610759
E	 info@drivetech-international.com
Although this whitepaper is designed to provide accurate and authoritative information with regard to 
the subject matter concerned, the authors and their organisations accept no responsibility for errors and 
omissions. No part of these pages may be reproduced without the written prior permission of DriveTech.
© DriveTech 2020 – DTR703 / Issue 2 / May 2020
