Building Driver’s Trust in Lane Change Assistance Systems by
Adapting to Driver’s Uncertainty States*
Fei Yan1, Mark Eilers1, Andreas L¨udtke1, Martin Baumann2
Abstract— Driver’s uncertainty during decision-making in
overtaking results in long reaction times and potentially danger-
ous lane change maneuvers. Current lane change assistance sys-
tems focus on safety assessments providing either too conserva-
tive or excessive warnings, which inﬂuence driver’s acceptance
and trust in these systems. Inspired by the emancipation theory
of trust, we expect systems providing information adapted to
driver’s uncertainty states to simultaneously help to reduce long
reaction times and build the overall trust in automation. In
previous work, we presented an adaptive lane change assistance
system based on this concept utilizing a probabilistic model of
driver’s uncertainty. In this paper, we investigate whether the
proposed system is able to improve reaction times and build
trust in the automation as expected. A simulator study was
conducted to compare the proposed system with an unassisted
baseline and three reference systems not adaptive to driver’s
uncertainty. The results show while all systems reduce reaction
times compared to the baseline, the proposed adaptive system
is the most trusted and accepted.
I. INTRODUCTION
As a complex and frequently performed driving behavior
on motorways, the lane change maneuver has been ranked as
one of the most dangerous maneuvers [1]. Statistics released
by the German Federal Statistical Ofﬁce [2] report that
approx. 13 percent of crashes on motorways in 2014 occurred
during lane change maneuvers. Typically, the driving task of
changing a lane on motorways is time-demanding, in that
the driver has to make a lane change decision within a very
restricted time frame.
According to the four-stage model of human-information
processing [3], during a lane change maneuver drivers must
perceive information, interpret this information, make deci-
sions for lane changes and execute the respective actions.
As the decision-making process usually involves uncertainty
[4], driver’s uncertainty is supposed to greatly inﬂuence
the driver’s decision-making process during lane change
maneuvers. As reported by [5], driver’s uncertainty about
the current situation can substantially prolong this decision-
making process, potentially leading to dangerous lane change
maneuvers. The development of lane change assistance sys-
tems that consider driver’s uncertainty can therefore essen-
tially contribute to improving trafﬁc safety, by providing
*Research received funding from the funding initiative Nieders¨achsisches
Vorab of the Volkswagen Foundation and the Ministry of Science and
Culture of Lower Saxony.
1Fei Yan, Mark Eilers and Andreas L¨udtke are with the OFFIS
Institute for Information Technology, Escherweg 2, 26121 Oldenburg,
Germany
fei.yan@offis.de,mark.eilers@offis.de,
andreas.luedtke@offis.de
2Martin
Baumann
is
with
the
Department
of
Human
Factors,
University of Ulm, Albert-Einstein-Allee 41, 89081 Ulm, Germany
martin.baumann@uni-ulm.de
relevant information when the driver is highly uncertain
to reduce decision and consequently overall reaction times.
In the context of this paper, driver’s uncertainty during
decision-making shall be deﬁned as driver’s difﬁculty to
decide whether to overtake or to wait in a given lane change
situation. We note that our notion of driver’s uncertainty
exclusively refers to the difﬁculties during decision-making
after the perception process.
Another important issue in human-machine interaction is
the notion of trust. Trust is deﬁned as the attitude that an
agent will help achieve an individual’s goals in a situation
characterized by uncertainty and vulnerability [6] and can
greatly inﬂuence the human use of systems [7]. Hence,
while developing lane change assistance systems, building
appropriate trust in assistance systems needs also to be
adequately considered. The automotive industry has already
provided many lane change assistance systems. For instance,
Ford and Mercedes Benz provide Blind Spot Warning func-
tions [8] that monitor the blind spot on the left and right
adjacent to the driver’s vehicle and provide warnings if
the blind spot is occupied [9]; Audi and BMW offer Lane
Change Warning systems [8], which enhance the Blind Spot
Warning with Closing Vehicle Warning functions that aim to
detect approaching vehicles through monitoring the adjacent
lanes behind the driver’s own vehicle [9]. However, the
information provided to the driver primarily focuses on safety
assessments of the driving situation but does not target
the driver’s uncertainty during decision-making in a given
situation. As this non-adaptive assistance in respect to the
driver’s uncertainty has an impact on driver’s mental model
[10] and further inﬂuences driver’s trust in these systems
[11], the interaction with current lane change systems can
be annoying and even disturbing as they might provide
information when the driver is already certain about the
situation. Such an inappropriate support without considering
driver’s uncertainty states can decrease driver’s trust in
assistance systems and further result in the disuse of systems,
which implies an inﬂuence of uncertainty on trust. In social
interaction, the emancipation theory of trust states that there
is a relation between social uncertainty and building of
trust [12]. Inspired by this theory, and adapting it to the
context of human-machine interaction, we assume that when
humans are not certain and the machine can provide useful
information at that time to help reducing their uncertainty,
they may demonstrate a general trust in the machine. In the
automotive domain, we assume that drivers (when they are
uncertain in their decisions) tend to build trust in lane change
assistance systems, when these systems can help to reduce
2017 IEEE Intelligent Vehicles Symposium (IV)
June 11-14, 2017, Redondo Beach, CA, USA
978-1-5090-4804-5/17/$31.00 ©2017 IEEE
529

their uncertainty with useful advices when needed.
Therefore, it is essential to develop lane change assis-
tance systems adapting to driver’s uncertainty states during
decision-making in lane change maneuvers for building
driver’s trust in automation.
II. A LANE CHANGE ASSISTANCE SYSTEM
ADAPTING TO DRIVER’S UNCERTAINTY
In previous work [13] [14] [15], we have studied driver’s
uncertainty during lane change decisions in a driving sim-
ulator and developed an adaptive lane change assistance
system designed for speciﬁc lane change scenarios on two-
lane motorways illustrated in Fig. 1: the subject vehicle (red)
drives on the right lane, approaching a slower vehicle (lead
vehicle), while a third vehicle (approaching vehicle) on the
left lane is approaching the subject vehicle.
The system adapts to driver’s uncertainty during decision-
making in lane change maneuvers while also considering
the criticality of the trafﬁc situation to provide sufﬁcient
trafﬁc safety [13]. A schematic overview of the proposed
system is shown in Fig. 2. With a frequency of 60 Hz, the
system receives information about the current trafﬁc scene
in terms of distance gap, closing speed and the resulting
Time-to-Collision (TTC) between the subject vehicle, the
lead vehicle, and the approaching vehicle. This information
is used by a probabilistic model of driver’s uncertainty [14]
to classify the current uncertainty state of the driver as either
certain or uncertain, and by a safety analysis component that
determines the criticality of the trafﬁc situation to classify
the situation as either safe or unsafe for performing a lane
change maneuver [13]. Together, they trigger appropriate
action suggestions to the driver via a dedicated Human
Machine Interface (HMI).
The model of driver’s uncertainty is realized as a tree-
augmented na¨ıve Bayesian classiﬁer [14], learned from ex-
perimental data, obtained in a simulator study [15]. Let U
denote a binary variable representing the driver’s uncertainty,
where U = 0 represents that the driver is uncertain and
U = 1 represents that the driver is certain, TTCA (resp.
TTCB) denotes a discrete random variable representing the
TTC between the subject and the lead-vehicle (resp. the
approaching and the subject vehicle), and GA (resp. GB)
denotes a discrete random variable representing the distance
gap between the subject and the lead vehicle (resp. the
approaching and the subject vehicle). The model factorizes
the joint probability over all variables as [14]:
P (U, TTCA, GA, TTCB, GB) = P (U) P (TTCB|U)
P (GB|TTCB, U) P (GA|GB, U) P (TTCA|GA, U)
(1)
Fig. 1.
Basic lane change scenario used in the experiment
Fig. 2.
A schematic overview of the proposed system
The
model
of
driver’s
uncertainty
is
then
used
to
infer
the
conditional
probability
of
the
driver’s
uncertainty
for
a
given
trafﬁc
situation
P (U|TTCA = ttca, GA = ga, TTCB = ttcb, GB = gb).
Although simple, evaluations on test data show an average
accuracy of approx. 0.78 [14].
The safety analysis component classiﬁes the current trafﬁc
situation as either safe or unsafe for performing a lane change
maneuver in order to overtake the lead vehicle by comparing
the current distance gap between the subject and approaching
vehicle to three distinct distance thresholds (36m, 42m,
and 48m) for three important closing speeds between the
subject and the approaching vehicle (2.78 m/s, 4.17 m/s and
5.56 m/s). For a given closing speed, the safety analysis
classiﬁes the trafﬁc situation as safe for changing a lane if the
distance gap between the subject vehicle and the approaching
vehicle is above the corresponding distance threshold, and as
unsafe otherwise. The thresholds were derived from a driving
simulator study and represent the participants’ subjective
limits on minimal distance gaps, below which 90 % of all
participants decided against a lane change maneuver [13].
The classiﬁcations provided by the model of driver’s
uncertainty and the safety analysis are then used to trigger
action suggestions on the HMI via three symbols represent-
ing abstract faces with distinct emotional expressions (Fig.
3):
• If drivers are certain and the lane change is safe, the
system suggests to overtake in a conservative way, using
a transparent “yes” symbol;
• If drivers are uncertain and the lane change is safe, it
suggests to overtake in an active way, using a green
“yes” symbol;
• When the lane change is unsafe, it suggests to decelerate
in an active way, using the red “no” symbol.
Fig. 3.
Designed symbols for the interface of the proposed lane change
assistance system. We choose symbols of abstract faces with distinct
emotional expressions due to their properties to be perceived quickly and
almost capacity-free by humans [16].
530

III. METHOD
In this paper, we evaluate the previously developed lane
change assistance system [13] in regards to its abilities to
reduce reaction times and build trust in automation. More
speciﬁcally, we focus on the following research questions:
• RQ 1: Can the use of the proposed system reduce
reaction times?
• RQ 2: Can trust be built between driver and the
proposed lane change assistance system that adapts to
driver’s uncertainty?
• RQ 3: Is the proposed system more trusted and accepted
than comparable reference systems that don’t consider
driver’s uncertainty?
To answer these research questions, we have conducted a
driving simulator study, targeting a speciﬁc lane change
scenario on two-lane motorways shown in Fig. 1. The subject
vehicle drives with a constant speed of 130 km/h, approach-
ing a lead vehicle travelling with a constant speed of 100
km/h, while a third vehicle on the left lane is approaching
the subject vehicle with a constant speed of 140 km/h but
in varying distances. Importantly, all vehicles, including the
subject vehicle, drive autonomously, with the participants
only deciding lane changes through game controllers (Fig.
4) without actually accelerating or braking.
A. Participants
20 volunteers (5 males, 15 females) with an average age of
24.3 years (SD = 6.5 years) recruited from the University of
Oldenburg took part in the experiment. They all held a valid
German driver license and had an average driving experience
of 6.7 years (SD = 6.3 years). They were paid 15 for their
approx. 90-minute participation.
B. Apparatus
The experiment was conducted in a ﬁxed based driving
simulator at the OFFIS Institute for Information Technology.
The simulator comprises a mockup of the driver’s cap of a
BMW, positioned amidst three projection surfaces for a simu-
lated 3D-enviroment, providing a ﬁeld of view of approx. 150
degrees. The instruments and exterior mirrors are simulated
on tablet pcs embedded in the mockup. The simulation
environment is generated by the driving simulation software
SILAB. A game controller is additionally used for inputs of
the participants (Fig. 4).
C. Experimental Design
In regards to RQ 1 and RQ 2, it is necessary to set an
unassisted baseline condition to which the proposed system
can be compared. Considering RQ 3, a set of reference
systems is needed to be compared to the proposed. In total,
we designed three reference systems, resulting in a set of ﬁve
experimental conditions: The baseline, a reference system
A, a reference system B, the proposed system C, and an
additional reference system D. The reference systems A and
B only consider criticality and use either a more salient
(system B using the green symbol) or a less salient (system
A using the transparent symbol) character for indicating a
safe lane change situation, and the same red symbol for
indicating an unsafe lane change situation. If a lane change
is safe, system A will suggest to change the lane with the
transparent symbol, while system B will suggest to overtake
with the green symbol. When a lane change is unsafe, both
will suggest to decelerate with the red symbol.
As the proposed system C uses three symbols (Fig. 3)
while the reference systems A and B only use two, it is
difﬁcult to determine whether an effect between reference
systems (A or B) and C actually results from the the use of
an additional symbol or from the integration of the model
of driver’s uncertainty. Therefore, a third reference system
D is considered that utilizes the same set of symbols as the
proposed system C. In contrast to the proposed system C,
system D does not utilize a model of driver’s uncertainty
but instead uses a ﬁxed time delay of 1.2 seconds between
showing the transparent symbol and the green symbol. Based
on pre-tests, we opted for 1.2 seconds as the maximal time
required to perceive the ﬁrst symbol shown in the left side
mirror. When a lane change is safe, the transparent symbol
is ﬁrst shown. After 1.2 seconds and if a lane change is still
safe, the transparent symbol changes to the green symbol;
when a lane change is unsafe, the braking action with the red
symbol is suggested. Although the four systems differ in how
they visualize the suggestion to perform a lane change, they
rely on the same safety thresholds for determining whether
a situation is safe or unsafe for performing a lane change.
In order to counterbalance a potential ordering effect
among the conditions (Baseline, A, B, C and D), a 5*5
Latin Square Design with repeated measures was used, i.e.,
each subject tested all conditions and every four subjects
had the same order of conditions. There were eight lane
change situations differing in the distance gap between the
subject vehicle and the approaching vehicle on the left lane,
each repeated ten times for each experimental condition and
subject.
D. Procedure
Participants signed an informed consent and wrote down
information about age, gender, driving experience, and driv-
ing miles. They were then given a handout with the experi-
ment procedure and safety instructions.
At the beginning of each trial, participants were instructed
to look at the lead vehicle. After 4.5 seconds, an acoustic
signal was given and the approaching vehicle on the left
lane appeared. The participants were then allowed to look
at the left side mirror in order to estimate the possibility of
changing the lane. If subjects found it was possible to change
the lane in front of the approaching vehicle, they had to press
the left button on the top side of the game controller (Fig. 4)
to show decisions for the lane change; if subjects found it was
not possible to overtake in front of the approaching vehicle,
they had to press the right button to indicate their decision
to initiate a braking maneuver. After pressing the buttons,
the lead vehicle and the approaching vehicle disappeared
and the next trial began. The participants had no time
pressure while making the decision and were asked to behave
531

as usual as possible on real motorways. Participants were
told that four lane change assistance systems (A, B, C,
and D) were developed to support their decision-making
for lane changes. They could decide themselves, whether
they would follow the system’s suggestions. Subjects were
then assigned to the designed order of conditions. Prior to
each condition involving an assistance system, a handout
with an explanation of the assistance output on the HMI
was provided, describing the meaning of the different sym-
bols in respect to the action suggestion of the assistance
system. We note that participants were not aware of that
system C considered the driver’s uncertainty. After reading
this handout, a training session of 10 trials with the ﬁrst
experiment condition for each participant followed to let
them familiarize with the simulator and the game controller.
After completing a condition involving an assistance system,
a questionnaire with 11 questions concerning the system’s
reliability, safety, sympathy, efﬁciency, and the subjects’
expectancy, acceptance, and trust in the tested system was
given, which was adapted from the trust questionnaire of
Jian et al. [17]. In the end, an interview for comparing all
systems was conducted with the following questions:
• In comparison with driving without systems, are the
systems helpful?
• In which system do you build most trust?
• Which system is most accepted?
For the last two questions, participants were also asked to
give reasons for their choice.
E. Data Collection
For answering the addressed research questions, we focus
on measurements of reaction times and the building of trust.
To get a precise measurement of driver’s reaction time,
participants were asked to show their decisions by pressing
the button in the game controller instead of really steering or
braking in the driving simulator. The measured reaction time
is then deﬁned as the duration between the acoustic signal
triggering the start of a trial and the participant pressing a
button in the game controller.
In contrast to reaction times, trust cannot be measured
directly, but is usually assessed by means of questionnaires
or interviews (e.g., the trust questionnaire of Jian et al. [17]).
As an quantitative measure of trust, we propose two surrogate
measurements, which we denote as the follow rate or rate of
agreement (RoA) and the follow time (FT), which reﬂect
Fig. 4.
Participants’ perspective in the driving simulator (left). Front side
(right above) and top side (right below) of the game controller.
separately how often participants follow the suggestions of
the assistance systems and how fast they follow them. We
assume that if a participant has built trust in an assistance
system, s/he is more likely to agree with and follow the
suggestion. Moreover, it is assumed that the more the system
is trusted, the quicker participants follow the advice.
The RoA for an assistance system is calculated as the ratio
between the number of times the participants choose the ma-
neuver suggested by the assistance (Number of Agreements:
NoA) and the total number of trials n: RoA = NoA/n
for the resp. system. Different to reaction times, which
are calculated for all the actions regardless of participants’
following actions, FT is calculated from the subset of trials,
where participants follow the suggestions of systems.
Problematically, both the RoA and FT are ambiguous in
that we can’t distinguish whether participants actually agreed
with and followed the suggestion of the assistance, implying
a certain level of trust in the automation, or whether the
suggestion simply conformed to the participants’ decision but
did not inﬂuence it. As all conditions included the same eight
trafﬁc situations, we use the trials of the baseline condition
to calculate a hypothetical RoA and FT against which we can
compare the RoAs and FTs of the four assistance systems.
For this, we use the safety analysis component to determine
what the assistance systems would have suggested at the time
the participants made their decisions. As all four systems
use the same thresholds for determining the criticality of the
situation, all result in the same hypothetical RoA and FT. If
there is a notable difference between the actual RoAs and
FTs derived from the assisted conditions and the hypothetical
RoA and FT, we assume that there is an actual inﬂuence
of the suggestions proposed by the assistance on the actual
decisions of the driver.
IV. RESULTS
The data obtained from the driving simulator was used
to calculate reaction times, FT, and the NoA needed for
the calculation of the RoA, which were then analyzed in
the free software environment for statistical computing R
(https://www.r-project.org/). The results for mean reaction
time (MRT), RoA and FT are summarized in Table I.
A. Mean Reaction Time
Compared to the baseline, all four systems are able to
reduce the MRT, with reference system D resulting in the
best average reduction of 0.24s and the proposed system
C resulting in the second best average reduction of 0.1s.
In order to test the signiﬁcant difference among the ﬁve
TABLE I
SUMMARY OF RESULTS
Measure
A
B
C
D
Baseline
MRT (s)
1.99
2.00
1.97
1.83
2.07
RoA (%)
85.4
84.4
87.6
87.3
81.6*
FT (s)
1.98
1.98
1.94
1.80
2.02*
*: Hypothetical values
532

conditions, a three-way ANOVA was conducted for the Latin
Square design with repeated measures. The results of the
analysis indicate a signiﬁcant effect of the experimental
condition (F (4, 72) = 3.90, p = .006) but no signiﬁcant
effects of columns and rows, which separately shows the
absence of learning effects or effects caused by individual
differences from subject groups. A post-hoc pairwise t-test
with Bonferroni adjustment of p-values shows signiﬁcant
differences in the MRT between the baseline and the re-
maining conditions (p < 0.05), and between system D and
the remaining conditions (p < 0.01).
B. Rate of Agreement and Follow Time
As shown in Table I, all systems are able to increase the
RoA compared to the baseline, with the proposed system
C resulting in the highest RoA of 87.6 %, increasing the
hypothetical RoA by 6 %. As a summary of NoA, the RoA
cannot be used directly for signiﬁcant tests. To compare
the differences of the RoA between the different systems,
we therefore conducted a Friedman test on the raw NoAs
among all conditions. It shows a signiﬁcant difference among
the distribution of the ﬁve experimental conditions (X (4) =
49.893, p < .01). A post-hoc Wilcoxon test with Bonferroni
correction shows signiﬁcant differences between system C
and B (p < 0.01) and between the baseline condition and
systems A, C and D (p < 0.01). Considering the Latin Square
design, a three-way ANOVA with repeated measures was
used, which shows a signiﬁcant effect of the experimental
condition on the FT (F (4, 72) = 3.29, p = .02). A post-
hoc pairwise t-test with Bonferroni adjustment of p-values
shows that there is a signiﬁcant difference in the follow time
between system D and all other four conditions (p < 0.05),
but no signiﬁcant difference with system C.
C. Questionnaire and Interviews
After trials with a speciﬁc system, participants completed
a questionnaire with eleven questions adjusted from the trust
questionnaire of Jian et al. [17], rating each system separately
with scores from 1 (no agreement) to 7 (total agreement).
The summary of the mean values of the questions, with
the highest score in bold, is shown in Table II. It can
be seen that reference system B is preferred in questions
regarding reliability, trafﬁc safety, efﬁciency, etc. However,
more interesting for us are the questions regarding trust and
the will to follow the system’s suggestion, in which the
proposed system C is preferred. In addition, participants also
reported that they had the most conﬁdence in system C,
which means that they tend to trust system C more than other
systems. However, the difference among systems is quite
small. Treating the given scores (1 to 7) as continuous data,
a one-way ANOVA was conducted to compare the scores
among the four systems for all questions and there were no
signiﬁcant results among systems. We performed additional
interviews to let each participant choose a single preferred
system in respect to helpfulness, trust and acceptance. All
participants found all systems helpful compared to no as-
sistance. 55% of the participants chose System C as their
TABLE II
SUMMARY OF THE TRUST QUESTIONNAIRES DEPICTING MEAN VALUES
FOR QUESTION AND SYSTEM (A-D), AND FOR ALL SYSTEMS (T:TOTAL).
Focus of questions
A
B
C
D
T
Understandability
6.2
6.0
5.8
5.4
5.8
Conﬁdence
5.2
5.1
5.3
5.0
5.1
Reliability
5.3
5.5
5.3
4.8
5.2
Trafﬁc safety
4.9
5.3
5.0
5.1
5.1
Efﬁciency
4.5
5.0
4.7
4.5
4.6
Sympathy
4.8
4.6
4.5
4.4
4.4
Support on time
4.8
5.0
4.7
4.9
4.8
Expectancy
4.9
5.0
4.8
4.8
4.9
Acceptance
4.8
5.1
4.9
4.7
4.9
Follow the system
3.1
3.4
3.6
3.0
3.3
Trust
4.5
4.7
4.9
4.6
4.7
favorite system with more acceptance and building of trust
than other three reference systems (A: 20%, B: 20%, D: 5%).
V. DISCUSSION
Regarding the general reduction of reaction times (RQ 1),
the proposed system is able to signiﬁcantly reduce reaction
times by an average of 0.1s when compared to the baseline.
Regarding the general building of trust (RQ 2), the pro-
posed system is able to increase the RoA by 6 % compared
to the hypothetical RoA representing the baseline. Assuming
that the RoA can be used as an indicator for the building of
trust and based on the interviews, we conclude that trust can
be built with the proposed system.
Regarding the acceptance and trust of the proposed system
compared to the reference systems (RQ 3), the proposed
system C is the most accepted and trusted based on the RoA
and feedback from the interviews. Comparing the proposed
system with the reference systems (A and B), there is a
signiﬁcant difference of RoA between the proposed system
and system B, but not system A. This suggests an advantage
of the proposed system over the more salient system and
also implies the beneﬁts of obtrusive systems, which is also
reﬂected by the reasons stated in the interviews. In addition,
three symbols were preferred to two symbols and were espe-
cially helpful for participants with less driving experiences
(< 1 year). Although system D resulted in the shortest
reaction time, it was somehow surprisingly the least accepted
and trusted, which implies that reaction time alone cannot be
treated as an appropriate parameter to reﬂect driver’s trust in
automation. The shortest reaction time might result from the
effect of the ﬁxed time delay between symbols, which forced
participants unconsciously to react to the symbols.
Summarizing the results above, we conclude that the
proposed system adapting to driver’s uncertainty during
decision-making is able to both reduce reaction times and
build driver’s trust in the automation.
A. Limitations
We are aware of the current limitations of the conducted
study in the driving simulator when compared to potential
533

ﬁeld studies in the real world, where participants may
perceive relevant trafﬁc information and behave themselves
differently. Additionally, although the ﬁxed setting with the
game controller used in the evaluation study helped to
precisely measure reaction times, it was rather unnatural,
in that participants did not really execute the lane change
maneuvers by themselves but only showed their decisions
through pressing buttons on the game controller. As an
alternative for future studies, we will investigate the use of
the steering wheel instead of buttons on the game controller.
B. Measurement of Trust
Regarding the measure of trust, subjective questionnaires
are widely used to measure the trust in automation. In this
paper, we proposed the RoA as a potential surrogate measure
of trust. Although the RoA does not actually measure trust,
we expect it to at least positively correlate with it. However,
the potential problem of RoA lies in the difﬁculty to ensure
whether the participants’ agreements with the systems sug-
gestions are caused by trusting the system or whether the
suggestions just ﬁt to the scene. We tried to circumvent this
problem by the introduction of a hypothetical RoA for the
baseline condition against which the RoAs of the assistance
systems could be compared.
Furthermore, it is possible that the RoA is also inﬂuenced
by the exact moment of when participants looked at the left
side mirror. We tried to limit such an inﬂuence by the use
of an acoustic signal to trigger the view at the left side
mirror to ensure that participants have similar temporal gaze
sequences.
C. System C and System D
Regarding the results of the quantitative measurements,
both system C and system D show a good performance
on reaction times, RoA and FT. However, following the
subjective interviews, system C is more accepted and trusted
than system D. According to the feedbacks of participants,
the possible reasons could be twofold. On the one hand,
the handout for system D stated the meaning of both the
transparent and the green symbol as “The lane change is safe,
please turn left”, leaving the participants somehow confused
about the function of system D and resulting in an initial
bad impression of it. On the other hand, some participants
reported the transition from the transparent to the green and
red symbols as too fast, which also potentially biased their
impression of system D.
Lastly, the overall small difference between the proposed
system and system D may be a result of the limited abilities
of the underlying model to recognize driver’s uncertainty.
We assume that a “better” model considering more complete
parameters will lead to a better distinguishable acceptance.
VI. CONCLUSIONS
Trust has been built and reaction times have been reduced
with the proposed lane change assistance system adapting
to driver’s uncertainty, which has proved our concept of
building the trust in automation inspired by the emanci-
pation theory of trust. We hope that our approach can be
transferred to other domains to help building trust between
humans and machines and further help designing trustworthy
adaptive systems. Complemental to Lane Change Decision
Aid Systems focusing on the safety assessment and pro-
viding warning functions during the perception process, the
proposed system additionally considers driver’s uncertainty
states during the decision-making process, which usually
occurs beyond the typical warned risk range monitored by
existing systems. Besides, because of the adaption to driver’s
mental states, it is treated much more as a “partner” who
understands driver’s uncertainty than a machine.
REFERENCES
[1] D. Harris, “The subjective probability of involvement in an overtaking
accident in the vicinity of a junction,” in Road User Behaviour: Theory
and Research. Van Gorcum, Assen/Maastricht, 1988.
[2] German Federal Statistical Ofﬁce, “Trafﬁc Accidents”, 2016, vol.8.
[3] R. Parasuraman., T. B. Sheridan and C. D. Wickens, “A model
for types and levels of human interaction with automation,” IEEE
Transactions on systems, man, and cybernetics-Part A: Systems and
Humans, vol. 30, no. 3, pp. 286-297, 2000.
[4] B. Beresford and P. Sloper, Understanding the dynamics of decision-
making and choice: A scoping study of key psychological theories to
inform the design and analysis of the Panel Study. York: Social Policy
Research Unit, University of York, 2008.
[5] T. Petzoldt and J. F. Krems, “How does a lower predictability of
lane changes affect performance in the lane change task?” Applied
ergonomics, vol. 45, no. 4, pp. 12181224, 2014.
[6] J. D. Lee, and K. A. See, “Trust in automation: Designing for
appropriate reliance,” Human Factors: The Journal of the Human
Factors and Ergonomics Society, vol.46.no.1, pp. 50-80, 2004.
[7] R. Parasuraman., T. B. Sheridan and C. D. Wickens, “Situation
awareness, mental workload, and trust in automation: Viable, empiri-
cally supported cognitiveengineering constructs,” Journal of Cognitive
Engineering and Decision Making , vol. 2, no. 2, pp. 140160, 2008.
[8] A. Bartels, M. M. Meinecke and S. Steinmeyer, Lane change assis-
tance. Handbook of Intelligent Vehicles. Springer London, 2012, pp.
729-757.
[9] Intelligent transport systems - Lane change decision aid systems
(LCDAS), ISO Standard 17387, 2008.
[10] C. M. Rudin-Brown, “’Intelligent in-vehicle intelligent transport sys-
tems: Limiting behavioural adaptation through adaptive design,” IET
intelligent transport systems, vol. 4, no. 4, pp. 252-261, 2010.
[11] M. Beggiato, M. Pereira, T. Petzoldt and J. Krems, “Learning and
development of trust, acceptance and the mental model of ACC. A
longitudinal on-road study,” Transportation research part F: trafﬁc
psychology and behavior, vol.35, pp. 75-84, 2015.
[12] T. Yamagishi, K. S. Cook, and M. Watabe, “Uncertainty, trust, and
commitment formation in the united states and japan 1,” American
Journal of Sociology, vol. 104, no. 1, pp. 165194, 1998.
[13] F. Yan, M. Eilers, M. Baumann and A. L¨udtke, “Development of
a Lane Change Assistance System adapting to Driver’s Uncertainty
during Decision-Making,” in Proceedings of the 8th International
Conference on Automotive User Interfaces and Interactive Vehicular
Applications, pp. 93-98, 2016.
[14] F. Yan, M. Eilers, A. L¨udtke and M. Baumann, “Developing a model
of driver’s uncertainty in lane change situations for trustworthy lane
change decision aid systems,” in 2016 IEEE Intelligent Vehicles
Symposium (IV), pp. 406-411, 2016.
[15] F. Yan, L. Weber and A. L¨udtke, “Classifying driver’s uncertainty
about the distance gap at lane changing for developing trustworthy
assistance systems,” in 2015 IEEE Intelligent Vehicles Symposium (IV),
pp. 1276-1281, 2015.
[16] A. Frischen, J. D. Eastwood and D. Smilek, “Visual search for faces
with emotional expressions,” Psychological bulletin, vol. 134, no. 5,
pp. 662, 2008.
[17] J. Jian, A. M. Bisantz and C. G. Drury, “Foundations for an empirically
determined scale of trust in automated systems,” International Journal
of Cognitive Ergonomics, vol. 4, pp. 53-71, 2000.
534
