Adnan, Z et al., International Journal of Emerging Trends in Engineering Research, 8(8), August 2020, 4357 - 4365 
4357 
 
 
 
ABSTRACT 
This paper evaluates a conceptualization of Vehicle Blind 
Spot Monitoring System (VBMS), which performs a more 
effective approach in eliminating blind spot of the driver. The 
newly developed smart blind spot monitoring system simply 
focusing on an advancement of the preceding work, along 
with compromising user compatibility and cost-effectiveness. 
Compact design, reliable and low-cost that contributes to a 
highly affordable safety feature are the flagship of this new 
system. Components selection is the main role in constructing 
an inexpensive blind spot detection system in the present 
work. Thus, Arduino UNO R3 model and HC-SR04 
ultrasonic sensors were employed for the VBMS system due 
to reasonable market price. Plus, the ultrasonic sensor has 
demonstrated a remarkable performance in the past blind spot 
detection system application. Concerning easy installation as 
well as maintenance on any vehicle, the VBMS is designed as 
a compact device which assembles the main control unit and 
sensory parts in a single body to be located at the bottom of the 
side mirror. Meanwhile, the hazard-warning signal is 
separately located at the passenger compartment for easily 
visible by the driver. The angle and sensing range of sensors 
are both adjustable but vital as their projections define the 
blind spot limit accurately by characterizing low to a high 
potential hazard. At the end of this work, a complete VBMS 
functional prototype of has been establish which effective for 
real traffic on-road experimentation, with various conditions 
specified (static, various speed, and overtaken). From the data 
collected, all targets of the present work have been attained 
regarding monitoring phenomenon shown by the new-built 
system. Both pros and cons of VBMS are discussed for further 
improvement ideas on product development. 
 
 
 
Key words: Arduino, blind spot, monitoring sensor, 
ultrasonic sensor 
 
1. INTRODUCTION 
 
Throughout driving course, the vital thing is for the driver to 
obtain information about the changing position of other 
vehicles on the road to ensure a safe condition from road 
accidents and traffic jams. Nonetheless, with the help of side 
mirrors either does not covers the entire area around the 
vehicle to be seen straight by the driver, as the rear quarter 
area on both sides of the vehicle are outside the side mirror’s 
reflection view. This is referred to as blind spot of the vehicle 
[1]. The blind spot is crucial at a certain condition whereby 
driver fails to detect the presence of hazard as other vehicle 
enters the blind spot area, due to the structural elements of the 
vehicles that limits a full assessment of the road situation [2]. 
This is the primary cause of vehicle crashes that mostly 
happens towards motorcyclist, which also has been proven by 
simulation analysis that blind spot happens to be a 
contributing factor towards the rider visibility problem, other 
than view obstruction and high speed [3]. Besides that, the 
blind spot phenomenon may vary in effect of several factors 
like driver’s height and vehicle’s size. Plus, large vehicles 
come up with wider blind spot around the vehicle due to the 
height difference with standard-sized vehicles. Regards to 
this issues, special techniques which effectively tested in 
India were expressed in term of assisting driver as a 
decision-maker, by considering the parameter of rear view 
mirror and potential impact to diminish the blind spot area of 
heavy vehicles [4]. 
 
Nowadays, considering the safety factor, numerous car 
manufacturers in the worldwide have made a headway by 
equipping this technology on their cars with various ways, 
 
Vehicle Blind Spot Monitoring Phenomenon using  
Ultrasonic Sensor 
Adnan, Z.1, Hassan, M. Z.2, Ab Wahab N.3, Najib, S.M.4, Nasir, N.S5 
1Fakulti Kejuruteraan Mekanikal, Universiti Teknikal Malaysia Melaka, Malaysia, 
M041910036@student.utem.edu.my 
2Fakulti Teknologi Kejuruteraan Mekanikal dan Pembuatan, Universiti Teknikal Malaysia Melaka, Malaysia, 
zahir@utem.edu.my 
3Fakulti Teknologi Kejuruteraan Mekanikal dan Pembuatan, Universiti Teknikal Malaysia Melaka, Malaysia, 
norfariza@utem.edu.my 
4Fakulti Teknologi Kejuruteraan Elektrik dan Elektronik, Universiti Teknikal Malaysia Melaka, Malaysia 
suhaila.najib@utem.edu.my 
5Fakulti Teknologi Kejuruteraan Mekanikal dan Pembuatan, Universiti Teknikal Malaysia Melaka, Malaysia, 
nsyuhada_mn@yahoo.com 
 
        ISSN  2347 - 3983 
Volume 8. No. 8, August 2020 
International Journal of Emerging Trends in Engineering Research 
Available Online at http://www.warse.org/IJETER/static/pdf/file/ijeter50882020.pdf 
https://doi.org/10.30534/ijeter/2020/50882020 
 

Adnan, Z et al., International Journal of Emerging Trends in Engineering Research, 8(8), August 2020, 4357 - 4365 
4358 
 
 
initiated by Blind Spot Information System (BLIS) for Volvo, 
Audi Side Assist (ASA) for Audi and Blind Spot Monitoring 
(BSM) used by Mitsubishi, Toyota and Mazda as well. In an 
advanced automotive application, Vehicle Anti-Lock Braking 
System (ABS) is possibly taken in control accordingly by the 
incorporation of an ultrasonic sensor and Control Area 
Network (CAN) Bus protocol to prevent collision [5]. 
Unfortunately, it is estimated that until 2016, only 3% of 
vehicle sales in Malaysia are manufactured with this 
technology feature, which is technically little to none [6]. 
While back in two years ago, the first test for blind spot 
technology has been commenced by the New Car Assessment 
Programme for South East Asian Countries (ASEAN NCAP), 
conducted on ten ASEAN popular car models but none 
among them are of Malaysia’s product [7]. This shows that 
the demand for Malaysian vehicle manufacturers to include 
this safety equipment on our local products is at a crucial 
state.  
Many approaches have been attempted to tackle the blind spot 
phenomenon such as a camera-based system that used several 
stages for image processing but encounters a big issue 
regarding insufficient images for extraction, that contributes 
to false and missing detections issue [8]. The panoramic view 
that provides extra safety information also may be useful if the 
distortion issue and slower performance regarding this work 
can be solved [9]. Thus, a simple processing approach via 
optical flow has been demonstrated in compromising a 
real-time safety alarm, without database usage [10, 11, 12], 
even a different technique through detection of shadows in 
daytime and headlamps in night-time had been attempted for 
faster detection but requires two different algorithms [13]. 
Another project proposed a hybrid algorithm detection 
system, designed to bring both efficiency and accuracy, which 
consumes a fish-eye camera for a wide-angle view and 
software combination to defines the incoming hazard, but not 
experimentally proved [14]. A different complex deep 
learning approach need to be employed in achieving a vision 
detection that is powerful towards environmental light 
intensity and shadow factor, which demonstrated up to 
97.56% system’s accuracy [15]. 
 
In short, the most favourable challenges that keep playing 
around in a vision-depending blind spot system are image 
distortion that resulting in false alarm and complex system 
configuration. This convinced the use of electromagnetic or 
ultrasonic radar detectors, whereby the operation does not 
restrict in the day or night time. Hence, this work aims to 
develop a functional prototype of a smart blind spot 
monitoring system for all types of vehicles. The Vehicle Blind 
Spot Monitoring System (VBMS) targeted to provide a simple 
configuration but with zero warning failure since this safety 
feature may be attributed to lives and severe damage matters. 
The prototype was tested in real road traffic with engagement 
of the Perodua Axia 1.0 model as a testing vehicle. 
2. RELATED WORKS  
 
2.1 Ultrasonic sensor applications 
 
The ultrasonic sensor had been used for wide applications due 
to easy implementation, ultimately reduces the cost matter at 
the same time offers fast operation. The ultrasound wave used 
is categorized as a frequency wave beyond 20 kHz up to 
Gigahertz, which is too high to be audible by the human’s ear 
[16]. A work regarding ultrasonic sensor application on 
remotely controlled robots had observed excellent distance 
measuring accuracy for avoiding single solid and 
uniform-shaped obstacles [17], plus the ability to control the 
movement 
of 
autonomous 
robots 
effectively 
[18]. 
Furthermore, this sensor in combination with a potentiometer 
may help in searching for available parking slots in shopping 
malls for instance, via an online server system [19]. A great 
project 
regarding 
automatically 
operated 
sewerage 
management had demonstrated efficient river blockage 
removal by determining the height of accumulated waste 
using sensors inside a designed platform [20]. These studies 
show that short distance measurement can be performed well 
by the ultrasonic sensor in various ways from the small to 
bigger applications. 
 
2.2 Arduino-based sensor for blind spot detection 
 
A Vehicle Blind Spot System (VBSS) prototype device 
proposed by [21] is an example of which blind spot detection 
that employs the Arduino control unit and the ultrasonic 
sensors 
which 
are 
ultimately 
cheaper 
than 
the 
electromagnetic radar. The system has been effectively tested 
on the real road condition and successfully detected vehicle 
that entering the blind spot zone. Nevertheless, as similar to 
currently used BSM radar technology in the automotive 
industry, the VBSS distributed components installation 
around the car body still upholds a complexity issue. Wiring, 
parts assembly and warning behaviour need to be critically 
compromised 
for 
an 
additional 
equipment 
that is 
user-friendly. Hence, the contributions of this work will be 
attributed to a compact-designed system for easy installation 
as well as maintenance purpose, low cost and high 
effectiveness not only for hazard detection but to monitor the 
risk levels as a driver’s co-pilot. 
 
3.  METHODOLOGY 
 
3.1 Establishment of Design Concept 
 
The new product design concept for the overall system’s 
structure acquires compact and flexible as the main criteria. 
The compact or simpler design associated with optimum use 
of component device and body assembly, make it easier to be 

Adnan, Z et al., International Journal of Emerging Trends in Engineering Research, 8(8), August 2020, 4357 - 4365 
4359 
 
 
installed or ‘add-on’ to the current vehicle as well as 
maintenance purposes. Meanwhile, the flexibility concept 
drives a highly compatible blind spot coverage so that any 
mid-sized vehicle type may be equipped with this technology. 
The system’s internal measure is a key role in the 
performance of these properties. Figure 1 presents an 
overview of VBMS’s flow process.  
 
 
Figure 1: VBMS workflow 
 
The system begins with object detection in the blind spot limit 
which depending on distance of sensor propagation, in this 
case, the ultrasonic sensors. At this instant, the data signal is 
sent to the control unit to be processed. The Arduino 
controller takes over the process of identifying the hazard and 
make a decision. If the hazard is confirmed, a warning signal 
will be blinked to alert the driver about the incoming object. 
During final stage, the extra information provided to the 
driver regarding the hazard risk level via object monitoring 
based on the distance measured by a sensor within the blind 
spot zone, until it disappears. This monitoring technique used 
is similar to numerous Arduino-ultrasonic projects as the 
distance measurement determines different output behaviour, 
including sensing operation for liquid levelling [22, 23].  
 
3.2 Characterization of Internal Measures 
 
3.2.1 Sensing range set up and program sketching 
 
Beginning the setting up process, blind spot zone limit of the 
testing vehicle was specified first as the main part in 
developing the warning system which involves variables like 
viewing angles and vehicle model sizes [24], which is why the 
real-condition measurement on vehicle is important as 
demonstrated in Figure 2 (a). Meanwhile, an illustration in 
Figure 2 (b) expresses the right side of the vehicle with 
specific sensing range values, which being pre-determined in 
the coding program. These values may vary in accordance 
with vehicle size.  
 
(a) 
 
(b) 
Figure 2: (a) Measuring the vehicle parameter, (b) VBMS 
sensing range on Perodua Axia model. 
At first, 2.5 m sensing range for Sensor 2 was set according to 
the minimum width of standard road. By obtaining the Sensor 
2 sensing distance and the measured value from side mirror to 
the back end of the car, Sensor 1 sensing range and 
propagation angle can be calculated accordingly, which acts 
precisely within the set-up parameter. 
 
An Arduino Integrated Development Environment (IDE) that 
compatible with Arduino Uno R3 was used for the 
construction of programming code, enabling the serial input 
from sensors and LEDs to be transferred to the Arduino board 
instantly via Universal Serial Bus (USB) cable. C++ language 
was used for programming code, where it measures the 
parameters and functions to be controlled while monitoring 
hazard, including the sensing range that determines the 
VBMS warning behaviour’s. The coding sketch uses ‘step ()’ 
and ‘loop ()’ as the preparation and execution orders, 
respectively. The loop function that makes the following 
codes continuously repeated after every one complete 
execution [25], which is important to provide real-time 
monitoring. This part is responsible for the data processing 
stage and to activate the alarm behaviour, based on the 
sensing range. 
 
3.2.2 Design modelling and simulation for system 
functional validation 
 
Figure 3 describing a complete wiring diagram of the new 
VBMS on TinkerCad, the online-free Arduino simulator, 
allows the simulation to be run on the completed circuitry for 
functional-checked purposes. The written program code from 
the IDE software is used in the simulation test whether all the 
components involved could work with the coding program in 
order to pass the test before uploaded to Arduino controller 
set. This theoretical test is taken as a base standard for the 
overall connection and coding synchronization, and detects 
even a single misconnection and locates the source of error 
specifically. It is simple to use and very practical for system 

Adnan, Z et al., International Journal of Emerging Trends in Engineering Research, 8(8), August 2020, 4357 - 4365 
4360 
 
 
validation to be applied in the real application. This process 
also provides the overall design that enhances the 
researcher’s view for creating simplified system connectivity. 
 
 
Figure 3: Schematic circuit of VBMS simulation 
Here, once the system connects with power supply, both 
ultrasonic sensors emit the ultrasound wave within a specific 
range and sense for the distance of the presence obstacle to be 
transferred to the processing unit. In the meantime, the LEDs 
blink with different behaviour when the obstacle moved 
within the sensing range, as controlled by the processor based 
on distance value calculated. These processes are repeated 
continuously until the system is powered off. Four pins are 
equipped on HC-SR04 sensor, namely ‘Voltage at the 
Common Collector (VCC)’ for power supply, ‘Trig’ for 
impulse trigger, ‘Echo’ for impulse receiver, and ‘Ground 
(GND)’ for ground connector. The pin connection for 
program code to the control unit system is summarized in 
Table 1. All sensors and LEDs serial input and output which 
are the positive terminals are connected to the Arduino digital 
pins according to their associated PIN, while the negative 
terminal referred to as the ground connection. As one 
misleading is enough to cause total fatality, these connections 
are arranged in a sequence of the number of pins for easy 
reference thus preventing system malfunction in the VBMS 
performance test. 
 
Table 1: Pin connection to Arduino board 
Pin/Terminal 
Sensor 
1 
Sensor 
2 
LED 
1 
LED 
2 
LED 
3 
VCC 
5V 
5V 
- 
- 
- 
TRIG 
12 
9 
- 
- 
- 
ECHO 
11 
8 
- 
- 
- 
GND 
GND 
GND 
- 
- 
- 
POSITIVE 
- 
- 
6 
5 
4 
NEGATIVE 
- 
- 
GND 
 
 
 
 
3.3 Development of Device Prototype 
 
3.3.1 
Sensing 
unit 
operation, 
compatibility, 
and 
limitations 
 
Firstly, the sensory part of the system was chosen which is an 
ultrasonic sensor HCSR-04 module as shown in Figure 4, to 
be correlated with the Arduino set. Utilizing 5V Direct 
Current (DC) to emit a 40 kHz sonar wave, this sensor 
performs a non-contact, high accuracy range of distance 
detection between 2 cm to 500 cm range [26]. To operate, it 
emits an ultrasound that referred to as trigger wave which 
bounces back upon hitting an obstacle, called an echo wave. 
Due to Doppler effect, the reflected echo may be distorted 
from 40 kHz depending on the movement of the reflecting 
object but as long as the vibration does not being smaller than 
echo frequency, the effect is negligible [27]. In the new 
VBMS system, the coupling ultrasonic sensors work together 
in characterizing the incoming obstacles. These sensors plays 
different roles based on direction of projection for each to 
eliminate the blind spot but assembled in a single body. 
 
 
Figure 4: HC-SR04 Ultrasonic Sensor 
 
Upon one complete cycle of wave travel, the time taken 
gained is a twofold of the distance between sensor and 
obstacle resulting from triggered sound wave that travel 
forward and bounce backward to the receiver. The distance 
calculation are as prescribed by (1) and (2). 
 
                         
             (1) 
 
           (2) 
where, 
 is speed of sound (m/s)
 is temperature of 
air (ºC), 
 is distance from sensor to obstacle (m), while 
 is sound wave time travel (s). Considering 20°C as the 
normal ambient temperature (
), the calculated value of 
 is equivalent to 340 m/s. Finally, the distance is 
obtained accordingly by (3). 
 
         (3) 
where 
 is the actual sensor-to-obstacle distance (m). 
Through the division of the distance calculated by 2, the 
correct distance value between sensor and detected object is 
finally obtained. In general, the temperature of air within 

Adnan, Z et al., International Journal of Emerging Trends in Engineering Research, 8(8), August 2020, 4357 - 4365 
4361 
 
 
detected range affects the accuracy of measurement, since the 
sound speed is strongly dependable on both temperature and 
humidity conditions [28]. The VBMS system has been 
programmed for a sustained normal environment. Note that 
the speed of sound is directly proportional to the temperature 
as much as 0.6 m/s per 1°C [29]. Consequently, the detected 
entity will be measured nearer in elevated temperature and 
vice versa. Plus, the RH changes also may vary the 
measurement by 0.036% for every 10% RH change although 
it is not very significant under normal weather condition. To 
ensure a highly dependable measurement, both sensor body 
and ambient temperatures should be equivalent. Hence, the 
installing location of this new device was set under the vehicle 
side mirrors, to protect the sensors from sunray since it is an 
outside installation, thus preventing the body from heat 
exposure. The warning signal was separately placed in the 
passenger compartment, at which easily visible by the driver 
during hazard monitoring. 
 
3.3.2 Correlation of main processing unit with alarm 
signal 
 
Of the various electronics controller unit from the market 
survey, Arduino UNO model R3 shown in Figure 5 is selected 
due to small size, cheap, but offers sufficient processing 
memory as well as digital input and output pins for the VBMS 
system. In terms of functionality, this device has been 
effectively employed in measuring, controlling, and 
displaying data using appropriate components and systems 
for particular purposes [30]. Arduino is an open-source 
computer 
device 
equipped 
with 
an 
ATmega328 
microcontroller with 20 MHz generating speed and 16-bit 
enumeration specification [31], as a distance measuring 
meter for VBMS. This easy-to-use platform also provides the 
most basic functional digital device development for 
interaction with the environment by sensors and actuators 
[32]. 
 
Figure 5: Arduino UNO R3 
 
The Arduino Uno R3 receives the data signals sent from 
ultrasonic sensor, runs the uploaded program codes, and 
controls the output signal during the whole monitoring 
activity. Prior to most conventional radar detectors, a visual 
alarm is an effective way in monitoring both static and 
dynamic objects but requires additional parts such as servo 
motor and Liquid Crystal Display (LCD) [33], which also 
lengthen the coding task and running elapse if being applied 
to the present work. Thus, the researcher proposed a 
multi-LED approach designed for visual signal, interfacing 
with Arduino processor and providing information from low 
to high potential hazards as in a metering level which is called 
‘hazard meter’, that will be explained in Section 4.2. 
 
3.4 Design Finalization and Installation for Testing 
 
In the end stage, a complete and functional prototype of 
VBMS has been established throughout all involving 
methods, as shown in Figure 6 (a) which is readily available 
for on-road experimentation. In term of component assembly, 
past researcher demonstrated the use of a Bluetooth module 
for an efficient wireless data transportation between 
separately placed sensor and control unit to avoid complexity 
and plenty of wiring [23]. In light of this problem, a simpler 
approach has been taken into account whereby the main 
circuit of smart VBMS assembles both control unit and 
sensors into one body, thus cutting costs from an additional 
component and promotes ease of production. 
 
The VBMS device was mounted on the side mirror of Perodua 
Axia as shown in Figure 6 (b). As illustrated in Figure 2 
earlier, Sensor 1 is directed to area limit where the incoming 
vehicle begins to enter the designated hazard zone, while 
Sensor 2 that directed perpendicular to the side mirror 
observes the other end of the blind spot limit. It deactivates all 
warning signals upon detection to ensure the LEDs stop 
blinking as soon as the detected vehicles getting out of the 
monitored area, which can be seen by the driver. Also, the 
false alarm can be distinguished in certain cases of static 
object detection. The LED warning signal located inside the 
vehicles will provide information regarding the hazard 
condition to the driver. Dual-sensor system in an ultrasonic 
distance measurement also has been applied by [21] for the 
blind spot detection and [34] for characterizing the type, 
speed, and amount of vehicle, whereby both agreed that such 
way does improve the capability of the sensor compared to 
intrinsic usage. In this case, the VBMS can differentiate 
between static objects, i.e., wall, building, with the function of 
cancelling sensor (Sensor 2), and moving object, i.e., vehicle, 
pedestrian, via triggering sensor (Sensor 1), thus removing 
the false signal occurrence. 
 
(a) 
 

Adnan, Z et al., International Journal of Emerging Trends in Engineering Research, 8(8), August 2020, 4357 - 4365 
4362 
 
 
 
(b) 
Figure 6: (a) Prototype of VBMS, (b) Installation for on-road 
testing 
 
4. RESULT AND DISCUSSION 
 
4.1 Static Test 
 
This test aims to observe the ability of VBMS device in 
differentiating between static or moving entity, which allows 
removing false alarm occurrence that causes distraction and 
confusion to the driver about surrounding vehicles condition. 
Sensor 1 works by triggering LEDs warning signal if there are 
potential risk objects such as vehicles enters the blind zone, 
not the static objects such as divider and building which is 
detected by Sensor 2. Figure 7 shows that all LEDs at the 
hazard meter were deactivated during the test. All the LEDs 
were turned off when the system detects a building although it 
is in the blind spot range. 
 
This condition is attributed with the function of Sensor 2 as a 
‘cancelling sensor’, which also may be considered as 
controlling the Sensor 1. Thus, as long as the detected object 
is in the Sensor 2 sensing range which directed perpendicular 
to the car’s forward direction, Sensor 1 will be deactivated. 
This function also provides the benefit of preventing the 
alarm from triggering unnecessarily, in case of the detected 
vehicle is approaching forward to overtake and moving out of 
the hazard zone, which has been inside the driver’s view.  
 
 
Figure 7: Static Test 
 
 
4.2 Speed Test 
 
The speed test was conducted as the vehicle driven in varied 
speed condition, which at 60 km/h, 80 km/h and 110 km/h. 
This is because there is a huge difference regarding the real 
situation although the prototype has succeeded in lab testing. 
For a reliability factor, it is crucial for the system provide a 
good performance in operating at various speed levels such as 
60 km/h and 80 km/h, which are standard speed levels in 
rural as well as city areas, while 110 km/h is the maximum 
speed limit for highways route. A motorcycle was set as a 
controlled variable, with varying the position inside the 
hazard zone during the data observation. By considering the 
worst-case scenario, the performance of this prototype device 
towards larger vehicles is more convincing if it succeeded in 
this test. The examples of warning signal behaviour during 
the speed test were as shown in Figure 8, for day and night 
time. 
 
The VBMS hazard meter defines the potential risk from low 
to high risk to help the driver on decision-making before 
taking action, where the warning indications are such as 
follows: 
i. First LED is HIGH: Hazard is presence but at low risk 
due to safe distance from a collision, and certain parts of 
the hazard may be seen through the side mirrors. 
(“Watch your side mirror.”) 
ii. First and second LEDs are HIGH: Hazard is presence at 
a moderate risk, which is usually completely unseen 
through the side mirrors. (“Do not change your car 
position.”) 
iii. All three LEDs are HIGH: Hazard is presence at the 
highest risk, which is too close to collision and still 
unseen through the side mirrors. (“Slow down. Let the 
hazard be gone first.”) 
 
(a) 
 
(b) 
Figure 8: Speed test during; (a) day-time; (b) night-time 

Adnan, Z et al., International Journal of Emerging Trends in Engineering Research, 8(8), August 2020, 4357 - 4365 
4363 
 
 
As observed from Figure 8 (a), the hazard meter activated all 
three LEDs, indicating a very high risk for an accident to 
occur if the drivers decide to take actions such as changing 
lanes or overtaking. While in Figure 8 (b), the first LED on 
the hazard meter is HIGH, telling that a vehicle just entered 
the blind spot, which is invisible through the side mirror. 
Sometimes in this condition, half part of the approaching 
vehicles is still visible to the driver. The outcome from this 
test shows a good performance of the ultrasonic sensor in 
determining the distance of detected obstacles. In another 
distance measuring test conducted within 4 m range, the 
HC-SR04 sensor performance is described as having 98% 
accuracy and 100% precision [35]. 
 
4.3 Overtake Test 
 
The vital element during on-road driving is to ensure an 
effective inter-vehicular communication especially in 
multiple lanes driving, for the drivers to be well-informed 
upon another vehicle’s change in position and speed as 
proven by simulation in the previous study [36]. This test 
narrows the VBMS performance test on the different 
behaviour of approaching vehicles on the highways, where 
the multiple lanes of road condition promotes more 
overtaking action between vehicles. 
 
As shown in Figure 9 (a) and (b), no false alarm detected for 
both overtaking conditions. As a hazard alarm signal, the 
sensors must be able to distinguish either the monitored 
vehicle is overtaking which is less hazard potential, or it 
really staying inside the blind spot area. As observed, the 
VBMS warning signal were not activating false alarm when 
another vehicle enters the blinds spot at high speed due to a 
delay set up in the program code. 
 
 
(a) 
 
(b) 
Figure 9: Test for overtaken by (a) Car and (b) Bus. 
4.4 Performance Analysis 
 
As all tests have been finished, the data accomplished were 
tabulated for further analysis. The result of VBMS 
performance in each conditions and times are presented in 
Table 2. 
Table 2: Overall Test Result 
Test 
Condition 
Day 
Night 
1 
Static 
Pass 
Pass 
2 
Speed – 60 km/h 
Pass 
Pass 
3 
Speed – 80 km/h 
Pass 
Pass 
4 
Speed – 110 km/h 
Pass 
Pass 
5 
Overtake 
Pass 
Pass 
All criteria that are required in every testing condition have 
been fulfilled by the prototype device, with zero false signal 
occurrence. Furthermore, this safety sensor can differ 
between buildings and approaching vehicle, performs well at 
various speed ranges and the behaviour of approaching 
vehicles was effectively monitored. The newly designed blind 
spot detection system has successfully eliminates the blind 
spot area around the Perodua Axia. However, it is found that 
during the whole test was conducted, the LEDs were not 
blinking constantly while monitoring the motorcycle as 
shown in Figure 10, which indicated that the ultrasonic 
sensors were having difficulty in detecting irregular surfaces.  
 
The angle of wave incidence is one of several factors that 
responsible for the preciseness of ultrasonic sensor [29], in 
which this reflected echo may have deteriorated away from 
the spectacular wave due to smooth reflecting material that 
either having sound absorption ability or with shape that in 
such way could deteroriates the sound waves reflection away 
from the receiver [14]. This may be attributed to the detection 
of motorcycle and rider’s body during the warning signal. For 
instance, the utilization of a high-spec ultrasonic sensor 
ranging up to 10 m in the Adaptive Cruise Control (ACC) 
system has performed well in an attempt on a fully 
autonomous mode car during testing in a busy traffic area. 
However, the irregularities of road and pedestrian behaviour 
resulting to false pulse during the first finding, but after 
setting up a moderate threshold distance, the problem was 
solved [37]. For the VBMS device, the LEDs must keep 
blinking as long as the hazard stays within fix range of blind 
spot area. Therefore, this could be overcome by using a 
high-quality sensor to offer a chance of improvement on the 
system’s overall performance. 
 
Figure 10: Discontinuous warning signal 

Adnan, Z et al., International Journal of Emerging Trends in Engineering Research, 8(8), August 2020, 4357 - 4365 
4364 
 
 
5. CONCLUSION AND RECOMMENDATION 
 
The smart Vehicle Blind Spot Monitoring System (VBMS) 
system has demonstrated the ability to eliminate the blind spot 
phenomenon. This newly developed device has good potential 
as a vehicle safety feature in order to improve the awareness 
among drivers regarding the presence of hazard around their 
vehicle. VBMS had been made in simple component system 
configuration, consisting a single control unit that combines 
two other component functions collaborating with each other. 
The procedure of device development was done carefully 
according to sequence for software to hardware components. 
Hence, no flaw or skipped step happened until the final stage 
of production. The software system performed real-time 
processing without lagging due to fewer components 
involved, plus the sensing distance adjustment was very 
practical via IDE software to be equipped on different vehicle 
sizes.  
 
The best suitable sensor chosen had provided true information 
for the driver in various speed and vehicle conditions tested 
during the day and night time. The complete VBMS prototype 
has been considered achieving great cost-effectiveness in 
terms of components, installation, and the functionality 
offered towards a vehicle road-driving safety. Looking 
towards the future, the new designed VBMS system could be 
improvised in term of sensor quality, as the ultrasonic sensor 
cannot measure through walls, vacuum, high pressure or 
temperature, a high repetition rate, and unable to measure 
accurately in vapour environment. Applying a higher quality 
sensor to this system will provide the reliability in various 
conditions including off-road as well as four weather seasons 
in the overseas. 
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
 
The authors would like to thank the support and guidance 
given by Faculty of Mechanical and Manufacturing 
Engineering Technology, Faculty of Electrical and Electronic 
Engineering Technology, Universiti Teknikal Malaysia 
Melaka (UTeM), Malaysian Institute of Road Safety Research 
(MIROS) and ASEAN NCAP secretariat through ASEAN 
NCAP Collaborative Holistic Research (ANCHOR II) 
programme. This work had been carried out through the grant 
of FRGS/2018/FTKMP-AMC/F00387. 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
B. Maitra, M. F. Cheranchery, and P. Prasad, Rules 
for safe driving, in Training Manual for Drivers, 
2017, ch. 4, pp. 69–109. 
[2] 
P. O. Bresnev, A. V. Tumasov, D. V. Zeziulin, D. M. 
Porubov, and L. N. Orlov, Development of a 
detection road users system in vehicle A- pillar 
blind spots, in Proc. IOP Conf. Ser.: Mater. Sci. 
Eng., 2018, pp. 1–8. 
[3] 
D. Farooq and J. Juhasz, Simulation analysis of 
contributing factors to rider visibility issues for 
car-motorcycle accidents, Period. Polytech. Transp. 
Eng., pp. 1–7, April 2019. 
[4] 
P. Pitchipoo, D. S. Vincent, N. Rajini, and N. S. 
Rajakarunakaran, COPRAS decision model to 
optimize blind spot in heavy vehicles : A 
comparative perspective, Procedia Eng., vol. 97, 
pp. 1049–1059, Dec. 2014. 
[5] 
N. K. A and K. Venkatasubramanian, Intelligent 
collision avoidance system at blind spots or sharp 
turns, School of Electronics Engineering, VIT 
University, Chennai, India, 2015. 
[6] 
M. H. M. Isa, Blind spot technology must be seen, 
The Sun, pp. 1–2, April 2016. 
[7] 
J. Lee, ASEAN NCAP organises first blind spot 
monitor test, Paul Tan, 2018. [Online]. Available: 
https://paultan.org/2018/03/07/asean-ncap-organises
-first-blind-spot-monitor-test/. 
[8] 
D. Kwon, R. Malaiya, G. Yoon, J. Ryu, and S. Pi, A 
study on development of the camera-based blind 
spot detection system using the deep learning 
methodology, Appl. Sci., vol. 9, pp. 1–20, July 2019. 
[9] 
M. W. Park, K. H. Jang, and S. K. Jung, Panoramic 
vision system to eliminate driver’s blind spots 
using a laser sensor and cameras, Int. J. Intellgent 
Transp. Syst. Res., vol. 6, pp. 1–14, March 2012. 
[10] 
J. Saboune, M. Arezoomand, L. Martel, and R. 
Laganiere, A visual blindspot monitoring system 
for safe lane changes a visual blindspot monitoring 
system 
for 
safe 
lane 
changes,” 
in 
Proc. 
International Conference on Image Analysis and 
Processing (ICIAP), 2014, pp. 1–10. 
[11] 
C. Fernandez, D. F. Llorca, M. A. Sotelo, I. G. Daza, 
A. 
M. 
Hellin, 
and 
S. 
Alvarez, 
Real-time 
vision-based 
blind 
spot 
warning 
system : 
experiments 
with 
motorcycles 
in 
daytime/nighttime conditions, Int. J. Automot. 
Technol., vol. 14, no. 1, pp. 113–122, Feb. 2013. 
[12] 
C. Tsuchiya, S. Tanaka, and H. Furusho, Real-time 
vehicle detection using a single rear camera for a 
blind spot warning system, SAE Int. J. Passeng. 
Cars - Electron. Electr. Syst., vol. 5, no. 1, pp. 
146–153, May 2012. 
[13] 
B. Wu, C. Kao, Y. Li, and M. Tsai, A real-time 
embedded blind spot safety assistance system, Int. 
J. Veh. Technol., pp. 1–15, April 2012. 
[14] 
L. G. C. Iii and A. A. Hernandez, Hybrid detection 
for vehicle blind spot using fisheye camera : A 
Framework, in Proc. 4th International Conference 
on Computing and Applied Informatics (ICCAI), 
2019, pp. 250–253. 
[15] 
A. S. Alon, J. L. Dioses Jr., A machine vision 
detection of unauthorized on-street roadside 
parking in restricted zone: an experimental 
simulated barangay-environment, International 

Adnan, Z et al., International Journal of Emerging Trends in Engineering Research, 8(8), August 2020, 4357 - 4365 
4365 
 
 
Journal of Emerging Trends in Engineering Research 
(IJETER), Vol. 8, No. 4, pp. 1056-1061, April 2020. 
[16] 
N. Seckel and A. Singh, Physics of 3D ultrasonic 
sensors, Toposens GmbH, pp. 1-11, July 2019. 
[17] 
J. Azeta, C. Bolu, D. Hinvi, and A. A. Abioye, 
Obstacle detection using ultrasonic sensor for a 
mobile robot, in Prof. IOP Conf. Series: Materials 
Science and Engineering, 2019, pp. 1–5. 
[18] 
S. Lee, J. Lim, G. Tewolde, and J. Kwon, 
Autonomous tour guide robot by using ultrasonic 
range sensors and QR code recognition in indoor 
environment, 
in 
Proc. 
IEEE 
International 
Conference on Electro/Information Technology, 
2014, pp. 410–415. 
[19] 
D. N. Bagenda and C. Parulian, Online information 
of parking area using ultrasonic sensor through 
wifi data acquisition, in Proc. IOP Conference 
Series: Earth and Environmental Science, 2018, pp. 
1–7. 
[20] 
S. Talukder, M. I. I. Sakib, Z. R. Talukder, U. Das, A. 
Saha, and N. S. N. Bayev, USenSewer : ultrasonic 
sensor and GSM-Arduino based automated 
sewerage 
management, 
in 
Proc. 
CTCEEC 
Conference Proceedings, 2017, pp. 1–6. 
 
[21] 
M. Z. Hassan and H. I. Zainal Ariffin, Development 
of vehicle blind spot system for passenger car, 
Appl. Mech. Mater., vol. 393, pp. 350–353, Sep. 
2013. 
[22] 
V. Raikar, A. Ranjan, P. Poddar, and K. J. Chaitanya, 
Arduino based smart water level monitoring and 
controlling for domestic application, Int. J. Res. 
Eng. Sci. Manag., vol. 2, no. 2, pp. 138–141, Feb. 
2019. 
[23] 
M. Husni, D. O. Siahaan, H. T. Ciptaningtyas, H. 
Studiawan, and Y. P. Aliarham, Liquid volume 
monitoring based on ultrasonic sensor and 
Arduino microcontroller, in Proc. IOP Conf. 
Series: Materials Science and Engineering, 2016, 
vol. 128, pp. 1–10. 
https://doi.org/10.1088/1757-899X/128/1/012026 
[24] 
M. S. M. Hashim, A. H. Ismail, S. Abu Bakar, M. S. 
Muhamad Azmi, Z. Mohamad Razlan, A. Harun, N. 
S. Kamarrudin, I. Ibrahim, M. K. Faizi, M. A. M. 
Saad, M. F. H. Rani, A. R. Mahayadin, M. A. Rojan, 
M. S. Azizizol and M. H. Md Isa, Identifying blind 
spot zone for passenger cars using grid-based 
technique, J. Soc. Automot. Eng. Malaysia, vol. 2, 
no. 3, pp. 245–251, Sep. 2018. 
[25] 
E. Z. Orji, C. V. Oleka, and U. I. Nduanya, Arduino 
based door automation system using ultrasonic 
sensor and servo motor, J. Sci. Eng. Res., vol. 5, no. 
4, pp. 341–349, April 2018. 
[26] 
H. R. Hatem, A. I. Abdalla, and Z. N. A. Al-rawi, 
Design and implementation of ultrasonic radar 
system for distance measurements using Arduino, 
Int. J. Eng. Technol., vol. 7, no. 4, pp. 3115–3118, 
Jan. 2018. 
[27] 
A. 
Buachoom, 
A. 
Thedsakhulwong, and S. 
Wuttiprom, An Arduino board with ultrasonic 
sensor investigation of simple harmonic motion, in 
Proc. Siam Physics Congress (SPC2019): Physics 
beyond disruption society, 2019, pp. 1–4. 
[28] 
K. G. Panda, D. Agrawal, A. Nshimiyimana, and A. 
Hossain, Effects of environment on accuracy of 
ultrasonic sensor operates in millimeter range, 
Perspect. Sci., vol. 8, pp. 574–576, July 2016. 
[29] 
V. A. Zhmud, N. O. Kondratiev, K. A. Kuznetsov, V. 
G. Trubin, and L. V. Dimitrov, Application of 
ultrasonic sensor for measuring distances in 
robotics, 
in 
Proc. 
International 
Conference 
Information Technologies in Business and Industry, 
2018, pp. 1–9. 
[30] 
F. Hidayanti, K. R. Lestari, and R. Anwar, Arduino 
based 
conductive 
silver 
lamination 
device, 
International Journal of Emerging Trends in 
Engineering Research (IJETER), Vol. 8, No. 2, pp. 
265-270, Feb. 2020. 
[31] 
F. Baskoro and B. R. Reynaldo, Detection of lock on 
radar system based on ultrasonic US 100 sensor 
and Arduino UNO R3 with image processing GUI, 
in Prof. IOP Conf. Ser.: Mater. Sci. Eng., 2018, pp. 
1–7. 
[32] 
D. Asemota, Ultrasonic servo motor control with 
arduino micro-controller, Vellore Institute of 
Technology (VIT) University, Vellore, India, 2018. 
[33] 
H. K. Ali, J. S. Abdaljabar, and S. M. Abdullah, 
Design of ultrasonic radar, Int. J. Emerg. Sci. Eng., 
vol. 3, no. 7, pp. 6–10, May 2015. 
[34] 
R. Stiawan, A. Kusumadjati, N. S. Aminah, M. 
Djamal, and S. Viridi, An ultrasonic sensor system 
for vehicle detection application, in Proc. 7th Asian 
Physics Symposium, IOP Conf. Series: Journal of 
Physics: Conf. Series, 2019, pp. 1–6. 
[35] 
R. R. S. Bongolan, J. G. M. Eden, E. T. DT. 
Mendoza, J. K. A. Pancho, and E. C. M. Telan, 
Ultrasonic distance measuring study, Faculty of Al 
Taj International School, Senior High School 
Department, Riyadh, Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, 
2019. 
[36] 
G. Bulumulle and L. Bölöni, Reducing side-sweep 
accidents with vehicle-to-vehicle communication, 
J. Sens. Actual Networks, vol. 5, no. 19, pp. 1–16, 
Dec. 2016. 
[37] 
L. Alonso, V. Milanes, C. Torre-ferrero, J. Godoy, J. 
P. Oria, and T. de Pedro, Ultrasonic sensors in 
urban traffic driving-aid systems, Sensors, vol. 11, 
pp. 661–673, Jan. 2011. 
https://doi.org/10.3390/s110100661 
 
