See discussions, stats, and author profiles for this publication at: https://www.researchgate.net/publication/357569615
AUTOMATIC EMERGENCY BRAKING SYSTEM (A SYSTEM FOR DECREASED
HUMAN EFFORT)
Conference Paper · January 2022
CITATION
1
READS
11,463
4 authors, including:
Ashwani Gulati
Technische Hochschule Nürnberg Georg Simon Ohm
1 PUBLICATION   1 CITATION   
SEE PROFILE
Kashish Goyal
O.P. Jindal Global University
2 PUBLICATIONS   2 CITATIONS   
SEE PROFILE
All content following this page was uploaded by Ashwani Gulati on 04 January 2022.
The user has requested enhancement of the downloaded file.

1 
 
AUTOMATIC EMERGENCY BRAKING SYSTEM 
(A SYSTEM FOR DECREASED HUMAN EFFORT) 
Sumeet Bhardwaj1*, Ashwani Gulati1, Kashish Goyal1, Vivek Vij1 
1Mechanical Engineering Department, DAVIET Jalandhar 
                                      *sumeet.ckt10@gmail.com 
I. 
ABSTRACT 
Automatic Emergency Braking (AEB) is a braking system 
which helps to apply brakes automatically under the condition 
of emergency and helps to mitigate the severity of a crash.  
This paper deals with the study of designing and working of  
automatic emergency braking system using the various 
fundamentals of mechanical and electronics engineering 
popularly known as ‘Mechatronics’.  In this system Ultrasonic 
Sensors with the combined use of Stereo Cameras will detect 
an obstacle in front of the vehicle and it will tell us the relative 
distance between the obstacle and the vehicle. The ECU will 
then judge if an accident is likely to happen or not and the 
brakes will be applied automatically under this system. 
II. 
INTRODUCTION 
An advanced emergency braking system (AEBS) is a system 
which handles the vehicle automatically in case of emergency. 
The road vehicle safety system comprises sensors which 
monitor the proximity of vehicles which are in front of it and 
detects the conditions where the relative speed and distance 
between the vehicle and the obstacle suggests that a collision 
is likely to happen, as shown in figure 1.  In these situations, 
emergency braking can be automatically applied to avoid or 
reduce the chances of collision. AEB system has the capability 
to reduce the impact of speed or mitigate the effects of head 
on crashes, rear end crashes, right turn crashes and pedestrian 
crashes.    Automatic Emergency Braking (AEB) is an 
emerging form of Advanced Driver Assisted Systems (ADAS) 
which works on the principle of electronically controlled 
Ultrasonic Sensors which analyze and sense the speed of the 
Vehicle coming, and thus helps to apply AEB system into 
working [1]. The major factors responsible for the accident 
includes poor visibility of other vehicles or obstacles, ignoring 
traffic signals and not maintaining a specific and safe distance 
from other vehicle.    AEB is based on vehicle to vehicle 
communications (V2V) which helps to mitigate the effect of 
high speed collision to a low speed impact collision.  
 
Fig. 1.  Working Principle of AEB System 

2 
 
These systems initially alert the driver to take feasible action 
to avoid the collision. The alert may be an audio signal to the 
driver, Alert on the Display screen or tightening of the seat 
belts. If the driver’s steering and braking intervention is not 
adequate to avoid a collision, the automatic emergency 
braking system will be helpful in automatically applying the 
brake [2]. 
III. 
TECHNOLOGY USED 
ULTRASONIC SENSORS WITH THE USE OF STEREO 
CAMERAS 
The normal audible frequency range for humans is 20 to 
20,000 Hz. Ultrasonic waves are those waves which are above 
this frequency level of hearing, so these waves have frequency 
above 20,000 Hz. Ultrasonic Sensors make use of high 
frequency waves to detect the presence of an object and 
determine its range. These sensors emit ultrasonic waves and 
estimate the echo which is obtained by the sensor which helps 
in calculating the time interval and thus calculating the 
distance between vehicle and the obstacle. The Echo 
reflections of moving objects will exhibit a Doppler Shift, 
which determines the speed of the other object.  The ultrasonic 
sensors consist of two basic components: Transmitter and 
Receiver.  An ultrasonic wave generator generates an 
ultrasonic wave and after the wave is produced, the ultrasonic 
transmitter transmits the ultrasonic waves to detect an 
obstacle. Then, when the ultrasonic wave detects the obstacle, 
it will produce a reflected wave as shown in figure 2.  An 
ultrasonic receiver receives the ultrasonic waves reflected 
from the road surface to generate a received signal [3].  As 
ultrasonic sensors are not vision-based they can be used very 
effectively under the conditions of poor lighting and objects 
which are transparent in nature. Also we have used Stereo 
Cameras along with the ultrasonic sensors which can detect up 
to 500m range. Low cost components are only installed in this 
sensor. This sensor is adaptable for any conditions [4]. 
 
Fig. 2.  Working of Ultrasonic Sensor 
IV. 
CONVENTIONAL SYSTEM 
 
Fig. 3.   Conventional Braking System 
Figure 3 shows the conventional arrangement comprising of 
antilock braking system (ABS) which is used to apply the 
brakes with the help of discrete locking of disc and was known 
to be a very efficient method of applying brakes by pushing 
brake pedal downwards. This method helped to mitigate the 
skidding effect in the vehicle and was very helpful for the 
stability of the vehicle while at higher speeds. It reduced the 
danger of accidents to some extent. 
V. 
PROPOSED SYSTEM 
The basic aim of this work is to develop a safer braking 
system so as to have less human attention to the driving. 
Previously cars with sensors have been made which just sense 

3 
 
the obstacles and gives an alert to the driver. In this system we 
are exploring the recent work in an innovative way.  This 
system has an ultrasonic sensor with the combination of Stereo 
cameras which has a spatial intelligence of 50 meters and is 
having an environmental recognition of 500 meters.  The basic 
epitome of this system is to apply the brakes automatically if 
no action is taken by the driver in case of an emergency. 
National Highway Traffic Safety Administration claims that 
the use of Automatic Emergency Braking System would 
reduce the accidents up to 27% [5]. 
 
Fig. 4.   Proposed System 
In this system Ultrasonic sensors and the Stereo Cameras are 
attached to the ECU which records all the information of the 
signal given by them. A proximity sensor is attached to the 
lower side of the Brake pedal to sense if the pushing action is 
provided on the brake pedal by the driver or not and is 
attached to the ECU for simultaneously working of all the 
sensors so that the system should work effectively. The idea 
was further moved to actuate the piston of master cylinder 
with the help of solenoidal coils which are wrapped around the 
master cylinder as shown in figure 4. The solenoidal wires will 
get actuated with the help of a signal provided by ECU, thus 
making the master cylinder work and application of brakes 
will take place automatically [2]. Different Manufacturers call 
the AEB system with their own proposed names. Audi calls it 
Adaptive Cruise Control with Pre Sense Front, BMW call it 
Driving Assistant Plus, Honda names it as Collision 
Mitigation 
Braking 
System, 
Mercedes 
has 
Collision 
Prevention Assist 3.0 and Volvo names it as City Safety etc. 
[6]. 
VI. 
WORKING OF THE PROPOSED 
SYSTEM 
This system will engage the brakes automatically only when 
there is no assistance by the driver for an action to take place 
under the condition of an emergency. There will be two 
working regions of the system. In the first region, the 
ultrasonic transmitters will transmit the ultrasonic waves to 
find the distance of an obstacle towards the road surface. If the 
sensor detects any kind of physical obstacle, it will produce a 
reflected wave. The Ultrasonic receiver will then receive the 
reflected signals to measure the accurate distance of the 
obstacle. The use of Stereo Cameras is basically for the 
detection of vehicles, pedestrian and objects. This camera 
helps to identify the moving objects and it reduces the effect 
of false recognitions of objects from a far distance [7]. This 
system will then detect the relative distance of the obstacle 
and also the relative speed of that obstacle. If the system 
judges that an accident is likely to happen, it will first warn the 
driver with help of audio signals, alert messages on the 
display, tightening of the seat belt or even using red lights 
inside the vehicle. In the second region the use of piezoelectric 
sensors will come into play.  After the alert signals, if the 
brake pedal is pushed to avoid the collision then AEB system 
will get disengaged, if pedal is not pushed, the AEB system 
will be engaged. Piezoelectric Sensors will sense if the brake 
pedal was pushed or not and will send the information to the 
ECU. Consequently, ECU will send the signal to actuate the 
Master cylinder with the help of solenoidal wires and thus in 
the second region Automatic Emergency Braking system will 
apply brakes automatically to avoid any collision which was 
meant to happen without this system [2]. 

4 
 
VII. 
CALCULATIONS 
Stopping distance D = 0.5 ( V )2/a             ………. ( 1 ) 
Where ‘V’ is initial velocity and ‘a’ is acceleration. Every car 
has its own braking efficiency which depends upon the force 
exerted by the tires on the surface given by    
F= µN            ……….. ( 2 ) 
  Where ‘µ’ is the frictional coefficient between the tire and 
surface and N is the weight of the car. 
If we increase the value of µ the efficiency of car would 
decrease and if we increase the weight of the car we will have 
to counteract higher momentum. Therefore an efficient 
method of having greater downward force is achieved by 
using spoilers or by using  sticky tires. 
     If we consider 1g decelerating force which tires exert on 
the surface then the relation between total stopping distance 
and the alert area in Automatic Emergency Braking System is 
depicted 
by 
the 
graph 
shown 
in 
the 
figure 
5. 
 
Fig. 5.  Graph showing characteristics between Alert Area and Total  
Stopping Distance 
 
VIII. 
ADVANTAGES 
1. With the use of an automatic steering system, a driverless 
car can be conceived and materialized. 
2. In the proposed system, the uses of Ultrasonic sensors are 
reliable in rainy weather as well and this gives an advantage of 
using the sensors outside the body of an automobile. Stereo 
cameras are used for eliminating any noisy signals taken up by 
ultrasonic waves and once the distance of the object is sensed 
by US sensors it further provides depth of instructions about 
the shape and size of the obstacle. The combination of US 
sensors and the stereo cameras make the system cost effective 
as they are cheap and reliable. 
3. A recent study in US revealed that an overall 38 percent 
reduction for vehicles having low speed AEB as compared to  
vehicles with no AEB and approximately 70,000 U.S. police 
reported rear-end crashes in 2013 and 30,000 injuries in such 
crashes could have been prevented if all vehicles were 
equipped with Forward Collision Warning with AEB [8]. 
4. With AEB installed in the cars, the car insurance premiums 
are reduced. The manufacturer sees a reduced possibility of 
accidents thus they provide insurance at cheaper rates. A study 
by IIHS in the US presented that people owning Volvo 
vehicles having AEB technology were given insurance at 25 
percent lesser proportions [9]. 
IX. 
CONCLUSIONS 
Automatic Emergency Braking system eliminates or mitigates 
the severity of various types of crashes like head on collision, 
pedestrian crashes. In the present work, the use of ultrasonic 
sensors with the use of stereo cameras helps to determine the 
distance between the vehicle and the obstacle. These sensors 
are quite cheaper than other types of sensors available in the 
market. 
An Ultrasonic sensor can detect any kind of obstacle thus it 
also prevents collision of vehicle with pedestrians or it can at 
least mitigate the effect of the crash. It is emerging as the 
safest technology presently for the prevention of accidents.  
 
 

5 
 
REFERENCES 
[1]www.trw.com/integrated_systems/active_passive_systems/automatic_e
mergency_braking (accessed on 18th March 2016). 
[2] S. Kumar and V. Kumar “Automatic emergency braking system” 
International Journal of Research in Science & Engineering Volume: 1 Issue: 
3. 
[3] G.V. Sai Ram, B. Suresh, CH. Sai Hemant and K. Krishna Sai “Intelligent 
Mechatronic Braking System” International Journal of Emerging Technology 
and Advanced Engineering Volume 3, Issue 4, April 2013. 
[4] P.R. Niveditha  and S.Gowri  “Collision Warning System using Ultrasonic 
Sensors and Automatic Brake System”  Proc. of Int. Conf. on  Recent Trends in 
Information, Telecommunication and Computing, ITC. 
[5] www.autoblog.com/2012/06/15/euro-ncap-will-soon-require-auto-
braking-for-five-star-safety-ra/ (accessed on 20th March 2016). 
[6] www.thatcham.org/car-safety//wp-content/uploads/2016/02/The-
different-names-for-AEB.pdf (accessed on 21st March 2016). 
[7] Wei Zhang “Vehicle Pedestrian Detection using Stereo Vision Technology” 
3rd International Conference on Road Safety and Simulation, September 14-
16, 2011, Indianapolis, USA. 
[8] www.euroncap.com/en/press-media/press-releases/study-confirms-high-
effectiveness-of-low-speed-autonomous-emergency-braking-aeb (accessed 
on 22nd March 2016). 
[9] http://www.telegraph.co.uk/motoring/road-safety/9630767/Cheaper-
insurance-for-cars-with-auto-braking.html (accessed on 16th March 2016). 
 
 
 
 
 
View publication stats
