Tech Library
[Sep. 2021] Application Note
Child Presence Detection System
Contents
•	 Overview of the child presence detection system
•	 Components proposed by TDK and their effects
•	 Passive components that contribute to the communications quality of in-vehicle cameras (ADL series)
•	 TDK is expanding its sensor portfolio
•	 TDK products support millimeter wave sensing device development (radio wave absorbent materials, anechoic chambers)
•	 Summary
Anechoic Chambers and Radio Wave Absorbers
Inductors (Coils)
Sensors and Sensor Systems
Leaving small children in a vehicle has become a problems resulting in fatalities. In North 
America, an average 39 children are left in cars and die each year*1. Reducing the number of 
fatalities in automobiles has become an issue for manufacturers as a part of their mission. For 
this reason, automakers are developing systems to detect the presence of children or pets in 
cars. In this chapter, we introduce TDK's related components and technical services regarding 
child presence detection systems.
*1. From KidsAndCars.org, a non-profit organization based in the U.S. (KidsAndCars.org)"
Overview of the child presence detection system
The child presence detection system uses various sensors to detect the presence of a child or pet in the vehicle and notify and warn the 
driver. Euro-NCAP (European organisation for automotive safety assessment) is planning to evaluate the safety of vehicles equipped with a 
system to detect children left in a vehicle starting in 2022. A roadmap for evaluation criteria (Figure 1) has been formulated within Euro-
NCAP, a European automobile safety testing programme, and it has been announced that evaluation of operation of child presence 
detection systems will be added to the scope of testing starting in 2022. *2
(*2) Euro-NCAP
*2. Euro-NCAP
Figure 1. Euro-NCAP's Evaluation Roadmap
© 2021 TDK Corporation
20211203 / apn_cpd_en

Components proposed by TDK
Examples of representative circuits for child presence detection systems and TDK products are introduced.
Automotive/Safety
Child Presence Detection System
Here are the optimal products for Child Presence Detection System for automobile safety mechanisms, selected from the TDK Group's product 
lines, including inductors, EMC Components, and piezo components.
Figure 2. Application Guide: Child Presence Detection
Application Guides
Automotive/Child Presence Detection System
© 2021 TDK Corporation
20211203 / apn_cpd_en

Passive components that contribute to the communications quality of in-vehicle cameras (ADL series)
The data captured by the onboard camera must be analyzed and processed by AI to determine if the object left behind is a child or pet. The 
most promising candidate for this is camera-based sensing. TDK provides circuit solutions centered on decoupling inductor components 
(ADL series), which are key products for the PoC (Power over Coaxial) method and are ideal for digital image communications.
Figure 3. PoC Transmission System Overview
Application Note
Automotive communication interface: Products 
recommended for PoC use (PoC filter inductors, chip 
beads)
TDK is expanding its sensor portfolio
TDK makes proposals for the automotive market using materials, processes, and modularization technologies that employ magnetoresistive 
elements (Hall sensors and TMR sensors) and MEMS. In the field of in-vehicle sensing, we have commercialized gesture sensors that use 
ultrasonic waves, CO2 sensors, and MEMS microphones, and we are working to develop various sensor elements and applications in the 
future. MEMS microphones can be used to identify the cries of children and pets, and it is predicted that there will be a time when future 
cars can perform sophisticated monitoring functions.
Figure 4. Sensor Product Portfolio
© 2021 TDK Corporation
20211203 / apn_cpd_en

Summary
Passenger detection systems are expected to be used not just with child presence detection systems, but also in MaaS (Mobility as a 
Service) and in cabin passenger control management and necessary for autonomous driving. These systems will control the air conditioning, 
sound, and even the opening and closing of airbags in the vehicle to provide a comfortable, safe, and secure environment. The TDK Group 
will continue to contribute to the creation of valuable automobiles by advancing its know-how and technologies based on its long-standing 
track record in automotive products.
TDK products support millimeter wave sensing device development (radio wave absorbent materials, anechoic 
chambers)
Sensing using millimeter wave bands is being considered as a method for detecting objects inside a vehicle. A millimeter wave sensing 
function with a wide frequency range of 60 GHz will be deployed as a global standard. Compared to imaging methods using visible light 
cameras, this method overcomes the problem of not being able to detect objects such as in cases where a child or pet is sleeping while 
completely covered by a blanket.
Absorbent materials for microwave anechoic chambers: IS materials
This radio wave absorbent material uses foamed polyethylene as a base and makes use of the ohm loss of carbon.
The radio wave absorbent IS material has excellent radio wave absorption performance not only for microwaves, but also from millimeter to 
sub-millimeter waves (up to 1 Thz).
Anechoic Chambers for Radar and Large Antenna Evaluation
Figure 5. Radio Wave Absorbent Materials for Microwave 
Anechoic Chambers: IS materials
Figure 6. Radio Wave Anechoic Chamber
© 2021 TDK Corporation
20211203 / apn_cpd_en

Related Links
Product Portal
Inductor (Coil) Product Information
A comprehensive guide to various information on 
inductor (coil) products from the TDK Group.
Anechoic Chambers and Radio Wave 
Absorbers Product Information
A comprehensive guide to various information on 
anechoic chambers and radio wave absorbers from the 
TDK Group.
Sensors and Sensor Systems Product 
Information
A comprehensive guide to various information on 
sensors and sensor systems from the TDK Group.
Contact Information
 Inquiries on products, sales, or technical matters
© 2021 TDK Corporation
20211203 / apn_cpd_en
