ABSTRACT
In recent years, a number of different Blind Spot Monitor
(BSM) systems have become more and more popular in
North American automotive market. The BSM system
advises the driver of vehicles travelling in adjacent lanes
when these vehicles are also in the driver's outside rearview
mirror blind spots.
Similarly, when the vehicle is backing up from a parking
spot, cross-traffic vehicles can be in the driver's outside
mirror blind spots. In this situation, the Rear Cross Traffic
Alert (RCTA) system alerts the driver when the driver shifts
the vehicle in the reverse gear and there are approaching
cross-traffic vehicles. The benefits of RCTA system was
presented by [1].
The RCTA alert studied in this paper is given by playing an
audible sound and by flashing the outside mirror indicators.
The RCTA and BSM systems share the same vehicle sensors
and most of their vehicle components.
The work presented in this paper researches a new method to
properly identify the RCTA alert timing in North America
where the rate of front-in parking is higher than other regions
and the parking lots are larger than in other regions allowing
for larger cross-traffic speeds (typically from 5mph to
18mph). Therefore, North American customers are more
likely to experience a situation that would activate the RCTA
system during backup maneuvers. The drivers need the
proper alert timing to respond to the different cross-traffic
speeds. The method proposed in this paper alerts the driver
when the RCTA system predicts that a cross-traffic vehicle
will pass behind the driver's vehicle within a given Estimated
Crossing Time (ECT).
INTRODUCTION
The goal of both automakers and vehicle users is to minimize
the negative impacts of vehicles on society, such as traffic
accidents and congestion, while optimizing the enjoyment of
using a car, comfort, and usability. To provide driver support
while traveling down a multilane road, the Blind Spot
Monitor (BSM) was developed to detect vehicles in the
adjacent lanes that are not reflected in the outside mirrors
(blind spot) and advises the driver of the vehicles existence
via an indicator in the outside mirror [2]. Using the rear-side
radar recognition technology developed for the BSM, Toyota
has also developed the Rear Cross Traffic Alert (RCTA)
system, which detects vehicles approaching from the sides
when backing out of a parking space(Fig. 1).
This article describes the objectives and concept of our
RCTA system and focused on an alert method. As an alert
method, Estimated Crossing Time (ECT) is proposed that
decreases driver annoyance due to early alerts when the
cross-traffic speed is low, and increases the effectiveness of
the alert when the cross-traffic speed is high. This is because,
for different cross-traffic speeds, the ECT method adapts the
distance between the driver's vehicle and the cross-traffic
vehicle at which the alert is given. The ECT value should be
large enough to take into consideration the driver's reaction
time to the audible alert and the time that it takes for the
backing up vehicle to stop. However, the ECT alert value
should not be too large in order to reduce driver's annoyance
due to early alerts. A panelist study was conducted to confirm
Alert Method for Rear Cross Traffic Alert System in
North America
2013-01-0732
Published
04/08/2013
Yoshihiko Takahashi, Tetsuya Komoguchi  and  Masato Seki
Toyota Motor Corp.
Nimesh Patel, David Auner  and  Bruce Campbell
Toyota Motor Engineering & Mfg NA Inc.
Copyright © 2013 SAE International
doi:10.4271/2013-01-0732
Downloaded from SAE International by University of Liverpool, Sunday, August 12, 2018

the effectiveness of ECT method and the alert timing is
appropriate in North America
Figure 1. Outline of BSM and RCTA system
BACKGROUND
In North America, an extremely common style of parking is
to drive forward into the parking space and to leave the
parking space by backing out (Fig. 2). Possible reasons for
this include the relative wideness of parking spaces in North
America, which makes it easy to drive front-first into the
space, or the fact that driving forward into a space makes it
easier to load shopping bags and other items into the trunk.
Figure 2. Parking style in North America
However, when backing out of a parking space, the drivers'
rear view may be limited by surrounding vehicles. It may be
difficult to view the rear cross traffic (Fig. 3).
Therefore, many people in the U.S. have reported feeling
concern about backing up and have experienced near-misses
in every day driving after failure to notice an approaching
vehicle (Fig. 4). Obviously, drivers in other countries are also
likely to have experienced similar near-misses when backing
out of parking spaces. Therefore, the main goal of developing
the RCTA system was to use the rear-side vehicle detection
technology developed for the BSM to provide peace of mind
to the driver by reducing near-misses when backing up.
Figure 3. View of driver when starting to back out of
parking space
Figure 4. Near-misses in everyday driving (internal
study)
The RCTA system was installed in the Lexus ES that went on
sale in North America in August 2012. The number of
models is likely to increase steadily in the future.
CONCEPT OF RCTA SYSTEM
The RCTA system provides driver assistance by detecting
and warning the driver of a vehicle approaching from behind
in an area that may not be visible using the mirrors or
rearview camera. The system notifies the driver using a
buzzer and a flashing indicator display located at the top of
the outside mirror surfaces. This concept is illustrated for 90-
degree parking in Fig. 5; Angled parking up to 60-degrees is
also covered by the system. Crossing vehicles which are not
on a path of intersection with the backing vehicle are not
alerted on; for example, vehicles in the adjacent aisle behind.
Figure 5. Concept of RCTA system
Downloaded from SAE International by University of Liverpool, Sunday, August 12, 2018

Alert Objects and Method
Table 1 shows the Alert objects and method. Following the
description in SAE J2802, the detection objects of the system
were defined as vehicles (including motorcycles) with a
displacement of at least 125 cc. The detection speed range
was set to between 5 and 18 mph, which covers at least 95%
of the speed distribution observed in North American car
parks (Fig. 6).
Table 1. Alert Object and Method
Figure 6. Speed distribution in North American car
parks (N=220, internal study)
Figure 7. Alert method by ECT
The Estimated Crossing Time (ECT) method was used to
determine warning timing that provide peace of mind, for a
wide range of approaching vehicle speeds. Specifically, the
RCTA system issues a warning 2.5 seconds before the
approaching vehicle is estimated to cross the path of the
vehicle that is backing up. This means that the warning start
distance increases in accordance with the speed of the
approaching vehicle (Fig. 7).
Data has been published by NHTSA (DOT HS 808 531) and
others recommending warnings in the range of 1.5 to 5.0
seconds. Figure 8 shows the concept used in this case to set
the ECT to 2.5 seconds. The driver reaction time to press the
brake pedal is assumed to be 2 seconds after the RCTA
warning [3]. The time to stop the vehicle by pressing the
brake pedal can be calculated as follows, assuming a
reversing speed (V0) of 1.8km/h (0.5 m/s).
where, µ m is the friction coefficient between the tires and
road surface, and g is the gravitational acceleration (9.8 m/
s2). Since this time is extremely short, the time to stop can be
rounded down virtually to the reaction time of 2 seconds.
This 2-second reaction time means that the driver's vehicle
will take 1 meters to stop (0.5 m/s × 2 seconds). Moreover,
0.5second of safety margin is added because driver's vehicle
will stop before the approaching vehicle will come to directly
behind the subject. Therefore the ECT was set to 2.5 seconds
after adding these times together.
Figure 8. Concept behind ECT of 2.5seconds
System Components and Human-
Machine Interface (HMI)
Figure 9 shows the components of the RCTA system. The
two BSM modules that are installed inside the rear side body
members each consist of a radar portion for vehicle detection
with an integrated with an ECU that performs the warning
control. Both the RCTA and BSM systems use the same
Downloaded from SAE International by University of Liverpool, Sunday, August 12, 2018

modules. Figure 10 shows an example of BSM module
installation.
Figure 9. System components
Figure 10. Example of BSM module installation
The RCTA system uses the same indicator display located on
the outside mirror surfaces as the BSM system (Fig. 11). The
outside mirrors are two of the places that drivers commonly
look at when backing up. Both outside mirror indicators flash
to increase the likelihood of attracting the drivers' attention
from the investigation of driver's looking points when
backing up (Fig.12). In addition, implementation of RCTA
always includes a rear camera system for those drivers who
prefer that method of direct visual confirmation.
The same main switch was also selected. Adopting the same
icon display with outside mirror indicators makes it easier for
the driver to understand that the BSM and RCTA are similar
systems that cover the rear-side areas of the vehicle.
The warning buzzer is installed in the upper back panel at the
rear of the vehicle. The buzzer tone specifications were set to
prompt the driver to brake the vehicle to a stop immediately
after hearing the buzzer. The urgency and importance (i.e.,
the degree of risk involved) of the system was studied, a tone
with a frequency of 2.0 kHz and an interruption period of 100
msec. was selected.
Figure 11. Warning indicator display
Figure 12. Different outside views driver looks at while
backing
Panelist Study
Panelist study was conducted to confirm the ECT timing is
appropriate for North American people. Twenty male and
female non-auto industry panelists with valid driver's licenses
were recruited
Protocol
A street level public parking lot was used to perform the
evaluation. Panelists in subject vehicle experienced 4 Target
car passes per vehicle. (2 at 5 mph, 2 at 15 mph) as Fig 13.
Panelists answered questions about the appropriateness of the
alert timing. Panelists were also asked about their preference
for one (directional indication) or both outside mirror
indicators flashing. Actual BSM module was used for this
panelist study, so the ECT value varies because of sensor's
detection performance ex) accuracy of relative detection
distance or velocity, angle for the target.
Figure 13. Protocol
Downloaded from SAE International by University of Liverpool, Sunday, August 12, 2018

Results
The result of the alert timing is depicted in Fig.14. The alert
timing of low speed(5mph) and high speed(15mph) was both
appropriate and the merit of ECT method was confirmed for
the set of 2.5sec over of ECT. Most panelists judged that the
timing between the alert starting and the target vehicle
passing as being appropriate with a few judging a little too
early or a little too late. For the ECT value, the set of 2.5sec
or over of ECT was judged appropriate than the set of 2.5sec
or lower from the two different set of ECT at 15mph target
speed.
Figure 14. Appropriateness of alert timing (
: ECT =
2.5sec or over, 
: ECT= lower than 2.5sec)
Figure 15. Usefulness of the directional lighting
Figure 15 shows the panelist judgment of the usefulness of
lighting one outside mirror indicator to display target vehicle
direction. There was not a strong preference for using the
outside mirrors to indicate target vehicle direction. Some
panelist preferred both outside mirror indicators lighting
because of the high likelihood of seeing the alert when they
are backing up.
CONCLUSION
Our RCTA system was developed to help provide peace of
mind to customers. The ECT alert method was proposed and
finely tuned. The effectiveness of the alert method and the
appropriateness of ECT value were confirmed by panelist
studies in North America.
Toyota intends to continue refining the performance and
expanding the functions of this radar to further enhance the
safety and peace of mind of the customer.
REFERENCES
1.  Neurauter, M., Llaneras, R., Li, B., and Green, C., “Issues
Related to the Use and Design of a Backing Rear Cross
Traffic Alert System,” SAE Int. J. Passeng. Cars - Mech.
Syst. 4(1):462-466, 2011, doi: 10.4271/2011-01-0578.
2.  Oda, T., Kawasaki, T., Okuda, M., “Development of Blind
Spot Monitor,” Toyota Technical Review 58(1):53-57, 2012.
3.  JOHANSSON GUNNAR and RUMAR KARE, “Drivers'
Brake Reaction Times,” HUMAN FACTORS, 13(1), 23-2,
1971.
The Engineering Meetings Board has approved this paper for publication. It has
successfully completed SAE's peer review process under the supervision of the session
organizer. This process requires a minimum of three (3) reviews by industry experts.
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a
retrieval system, or transmitted, in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical,
photocopying, recording, or otherwise, without the prior written permission of SAE.
ISSN 0148-7191
Positions and opinions advanced in this paper are those of the author(s) and not
necessarily those of SAE. The author is solely responsible for the content of the paper.
SAE Customer Service:
Tel: 877-606-7323 (inside USA and Canada)
Tel: 724-776-4970 (outside USA)
Fax: 724-776-0790
Email: CustomerService@sae.org
SAE Web Address: http://www.sae.org
Printed in USA
Downloaded from SAE International by University of Liverpool, Sunday, August 12, 2018
